Uber to pay 1.2 million euros to French taxi group amid widespread protests
Posted
App-based taxi firm Uber has been ordered to pay 1.2 million euros ($1.85 million AUD) to a French taxi group by a Paris court, according to court documents seen by AFP.
The payment to the National Union of Taxis (UNT) followed a complaint that Uber drivers were acting as traditional taxis — waiting in the street in the hope of picking up passengers.
The ruling comes on a second consecutive day of large-scale protests by taxi drivers angry over the impact of Uber, which Paris dispatchers said had taken up to a third of their business.
Uber France was accused by the UNT of being "ambiguous" in its communications with drivers about the rules for private hire cars, which under French law are supposed to head back to their garages after each fare, rather than park or circulate on public roads.
Uber denied the charges, saying it "regularly informs" its drivers of the need to return to their garages after a journey.
Despite a year-old ban on Uber's low-cost UberPOP service which links customers to unlicensed private drivers, taxi dispatchers in Paris said business had shrunk 20 to 30 per cent.
The controversial ride-sharing service Uber is estimated to have recruited 2 million drivers around the world by the end of last year, according to its chief executive Travis Kalanick.
AFP
Topics: activism-and-lobbying, law-crime-and-justice, road-transport, courts-and-trials, france
Turkish prosecutors seek life sentences for two senior Cumhuriyet opposition journalists
Posted
Turkish prosecutors have demanded life sentences for two top journalists from the opposition Cumhuriyet newspaper on charges of revealing state secrets, a report says.
The state secrets in question refer to an investigative report by Cumhuriyet that President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government tried to ship arms to Islamists in Syria.
Prosecutors asked the Istanbul court to sentence editor-in-chief Can Dundar and Ankara bureau chief Erdem Gul each to one aggravated life sentence, one ordinary life sentence and 30 years in jail, local media reported quoting the indictment.
The Cumhuriyet report said both Mr Erdogan and his hugely powerful but low-profile ally, the head of the National Intelligence Organisation Hakan Fidan, are named as plaintiffs in the indictment.
Mr Dundar and Mr Gul were both placed under arrest in late November over the report earlier in the year that claimed to show proof a consignment of weapons seized at the border in January 2014 was bound for Islamist rebels in Syria.
Since then, they have both been held in the Silivri jail on the outskirts of Istanbul ahead of their trial, whose date has still yet to be announced.
In the indictment, they have been formally charged with obtaining and revealing state secrets "for espionage purposes" and seeking to "violently" overthrow the Turkish government as well as aiding an "armed terrorist organisation", it said.
The penalties demanded by the prosecutors are significantly higher than had previously been expected.
The case has amplified concerns about press freedom under the rule of Mr Erdogan, who had personally warned Mr Dundar he would "pay a price" over the front-page story.
AFP
Topics: censorship, information-and-communication, unrest-conflict-and-war, turkey
Whooping cough vaccine in low supply causing five month wait, says pharmacist
Posted
Pharmacists in New South Wales are struggling to meet the community demand for the whooping cough vaccine.
Whooping cough (pertussis) is an extremely contagious respiratory infection, which causes uncontrolled coughing and vomiting, and can last for several months.
In 2015 in NSW there were 12,222 confirmed cases of whopping cough, a sharp increase from the 2,339 cases in 2013.
In Coffs Harbour and Bellingen there were more than 150 confirmed cases last year.
The Australian Government needs to work with manufacturers to ensure supply and prevent this from getting any worse Pharmacist, Freddie Rodwell
The disease outbreak has resulted in an increased demand for the vaccine, and those who are not eligible in the Federal Government's immunisation program are being forced to wait months.
"Community pharmacy is where the shortage is evident," pharmacist Freddy Rodwell said.
"I'm unable to supply the vaccine, based on my manufacturer not getting it to their wholesaler and not getting it to us.
"I'm thinking at this point the Government needs to step in and work hand-in-hand with the manufacturer to ensure supply for our communities' coverage."
Children undergoing the childhood immunisation regime, pregnant women, Torres Strait Islander and Aboriginal people, can access the vaccine through Government supply.
"The manufacturer is very proud to say that there has been no shortage to government organisations, whether it be hospitals or GPs," Mr Rodwell said.
"But those that aren't eligible are getting a script written by their GP and then coming into the pharmacy."
Some Bellingen Pharmacy customers have had to wait up to five months for the vaccine to become available.
Mr Rodwell is concerned that the disease will continue to snowball if the wait continues.
"If this goes on then it's just going to get worse," he said.
"That's the way these diseases work — the more people that have it, the more people get exposed to it.
"The Australian Government needs to work with manufacturers to ensure supply and prevent this from getting any worse."
The NSW Department of Health has been contacted to respond to the claims about the shortage of whooping cough vaccine.
Topics: vaccines-and-immunity, coffs-harbour-2450, bellingen-2454
Snowzilla: Australian's view from New York as big melt-off begins
Updated
Orange, in central west New South Wales, is one of Australia's coldest cities and last year received an unprecedented five snowfalls.
But for Mitch Kidd, his home town could not prepare him for what he has experienced in New York over the past week.
Now living in the US city, Mr Kidd has donned his gumboots as the mega-storm 'Snowzilla' tapered off and the big melt continued.
He has recounted his view of living in a city shut down by a storm that saw 68 centimetres of snow dumped in Central Park — the second highest total since weather records began in 1869.
Shock of the storm
Mr Kidd said due to recent storms in the US, such as Hurricane Sandy, New York city officials have often "over-exaggerated" storms that are coming in.
"I think a lot of people were expecting this to be a small dusting and that it would fizzle out and wouldn't have the impact that it did," he explained.
"The fact that they shut down the city and declared martial law was very surprising to everyone.
"It was a shock."
Taking it to the streets
Mr Kidd said the lifting of martial law signalled a moment when people started "taking over the streets."
"There were people skiing down Fifth Avenue, there were toboggans, there were some people getting towed around by jeeps on a snowboard; it was a sight to see," he said.
He said the only other time he had seen something like it was with Hurricane Sandy when the city was shut down for two weeks when there was no power and the roads were empty.
"I've seen a lot of snow but just the amount of it was unbelievable," he said.
"The amount of snow we had in the 24-hour period is the amount of snow that we expect over an entire winter season here in New York."
Conditions ease, residents emerge
There's simply no where for the snow to go...so it's a cycle of people shifting it around into different piles. Mitch Kidd, Australian living in New York
With the advent of blue skies, Mr Kidd said he and others got out and about and started taking photographs.
He said one of the most striking things had been seeing aerials poking up from the snow — indicating the presence of a buried vehicle.
"A frightening thing is that in some places, people have been buried alive in their car," Mr Kidd said.
"My car is buried; I don't think I'll be digging that out for a few days."
Big melt-off and clean up
As the snow starts to melt, Mr Kidd said everything was turning to slush and he expected to wear gumboots for several weeks.
"There's simply nowhere for the snow to go," he said.
"I used to live in Colorado where it's a bit more open space and they can handle the snow a lot more and they plough it and it goes off into a paddock.
"But here in New York City, they push it and it just pushes up onto the footpath and the doorman or the business owner comes out and shoves it straight back onto the road.
"So, it's a cycle of people shifting it around into different piles."
He said in some places, massive furnaces would be brought in to try to melt the snow.
"But it's only going to snow in a week or two and we'll be back in the same place," he said.
Topics: snowfall, community-and-society, storm-event, weather, orange-2800, united-states
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Alice Springs could host Sheffield Shield final if Victorian Bushrangers come out on top
Posted
Traeger Park in Alice Springs could host the final of the Sheffield Shield if the Victorian Bushrangers finish the season at the top of the ladder.
The Bushrangers today announced they will return to Traeger Park for a home game in the last round of the season to take on New South Wales from March 15–18.
The announcement builds on two state games at the ground last year when the Bushrangers played the Queensland Bulls in February and the Tasmanian Tigers in March.
Traeger Park also hosted an England tour match against the Cricket Australia Chairman's XI in 2013.
Cricket Victoria said if the Bushrangers continued winning this season they could return to Central Australia for the final, less than a fortnight after the clash with the Blues.
"We're very keen to be able to come back up here again for the last round and hopefully if everything goes OK we may have a strong consideration for coming back again for the final if we happen to make it," Cricket Victoria's general manager of cricket, Shaun Graf, said.
Mr Graf said the facility was first class.
"Cricket Australia have certainly given it the tick of approval, you've got the Imparja Cup coming up here shortly, and we're certainly very keen if we did happen to be lucky enough to make the final and host it we'd certainly give it strong consideration," he said.
'Struggling' to find a ground in Victoria
Cricket Victoria is in the midst of a long-awaited $40 million redevelopment of the Junction Oval in St Kilda as an alternative to the MCG.
"We have struggled for an alternative down in Victoria," Mr Graf said.
"At this point in time there's not many venues in Victoria that could actually host a final so we're conscious of that."
Cricket Victoria admitted crowd numbers for Sheffield Shield cricket across the board were not strong and attendance at last year's games were far less than organisers had hoped.
However, the Alice Springs Town Council downplayed those concerns.
"If you think about the interest around Australia this year with the BBL (Big Bash League) that's just been completed, I think crowds will come to this ground because you're going to see guys you've been watching on the TV over summer," Mayor Damien Ryan said.
The March game is expected to be a pivotal contest with the Bushrangers currently sitting on top of the ladder while the Blues are in third spot.
Victoria chose to host the 2014-15 Sheffield Shield final at Bellerive Oval in Tasmania, where they drew with Western Australia but secured the Shield title.
Topics: cricket, alice-springs-0870
Freak wave prompts rescue operation on Central Coast beach
Posted
There was a massive rescue effort at a popular beach on the New South Wales Central Coast, when three Sydney families were smashed onto rocks by a freak wave.
Eight people suffered serious injuries, including broken ankles, legs and arms, as well as concussion, when a wave unexpectedly washed them against a cliff face, at Avoca Beach on Australia Day.
Another nine were treated for minor injuries.
Brett Beswick from Central Coast Surf Lifesaving said it was a wild scene.
"We had to carry five people out by stretcher and chair a few others out as well," he said.
"Ambulances were brought from pretty much all over the coast.
"Five ambulances in total and probably took an hour to get on top of the injuries.
"We had to set up a triage area under the pine trees," Mr Beswick said.
"It was amazing. The volunteers did an incredible job."
Nearby picnickers also pitched in to help, with Mr Beswick crediting them as "fantastic" after many offered to give up their chairs for the injured.
"We laid down the other patients on spinal boards in the shade, and they gave us towels and blankets ... to make the injured as comfortable as they could."
Mr Beswick said it could have been much worse.
"They were very lucky that when the water receded ... if they were any closer to the rock shelf, there would've been a good chance they would've got washed back into the water."
Topics: emergency-incidents, swimming, surf-life-saving, gosford-2250, avoca-beach-2251
Former Comancheros bikie boss Mark Buddle given suspended sentence for $60k in undeclared cash
Posted
A former bikie boss has been given a suspended jail sentence for trying to fly out of Newcastle with $60,000 in undeclared cash.
Mark Buddle, 31, the former head of the Comancheros outlaw motorcycle gang, and his girlfriend were charged in July 2015 after being caught with the undeclared cash, as their private jet stopped at Newcastle Airport en route to Noumea.
Newcastle Local Court heard it was clean money and not from nefarious sources.
Buddle and his girlfriend pleaded not guilty to dealing with suspected proceeds of crime, but guilty to moving more than $10,000 out of Australia without a report.
Buddle was given a two-month suspended jail sentence and a three-year good behaviour bond, while his girlfriend was given a two-year good behaviour bond.
Magistrate Robert Stone noted the risk associated with money laundering and the potential for funding terrorist activities.
Topics: courts-and-trials, newcastle-2300
Preparations for tree lopping along Anzac Parade in Sydney's east
Posted
Workers and police at a site on Anzac Parade in Sydney's east where 100-year-old fig trees will be cut down to make way for the Sydney light rail project, January 27, 2016.
Topics: sydney-2000, randwick-2031
What do producers need to know to tap into export markets and make the most of free trade agreements?
What do producers need to know to tap into export markets and make the most of free trade agreements?
Mary River flooding hotspot to be live streamed providing vital information to residents
Posted
The installation of a web-based flood camera in Maryborough today will provide vital information to residents of the Fraser Coast.
The camera, which has been installed at lower Kent Street in Maryborough, will provide live vision of the Mary River upstream, and shows the approach to the Granville Bridge.
Fraser Coast Mayor Gerard O'Connell said that council deployed the camera so that "people can actually see what is happening, the condition of the road, the height of the flooding and then make a determination about business and personal regard".
"Lower Kent Street, which is a key manufacturing and industrial area not far from the CBD, is often one of the first areas to get inundated by a flood in the Mary River," Mr O'Connell said.
The camera will also act as a warning device for the city and is the second of its kind to be installed on the Fraser Coast.
"One of the key components of any disaster management regime is getting good accurate and timely information," Mr O'Connell said.
Topics: floods, environmental-technology, community-and-society, local-government, maryborough-4650, bundaberg-4670
Royal commission into child sexual abuse to focus on Church of England Boys' Society
Updated
A youth group operated by the Anglican Church will come under investigation during a week of public hearings in Hobart by the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
Key points: Hearings to centre on Church of England Boys' Society
Commission to scrutinise Anglican Dioceses of Tasmania, Adelaide, Sydney and Brisbane
Hearing will take place in Hobart from January 27 to February 5

Hearings into the Church of England Boys' Society (CEBS), a children's group similar to Scouts, run by the Anglican Church, will run from January 27 until February 5.
The Anglican dioceses of Tasmania, Adelaide, Sydney and Brisbane will come under scrutiny as the hearings investigate their responses to allegations of child sexual abuse connected with CEBS.
Of particular interest will be convicted paedophiles Louis Daniels, Garth Hawkins, Robert Brandenburg, Simon Jacobs and John Elliot.
Former Adelaide youth leader Brandenburg was accused of abusing up to 200 young boys involved with the CEBS.
He confessed to a series of child sex crimes, but committed suicide before facing court in 1999.
Brandenburg was known to take children on church camps to Tasmania.
Daniels, a disgraced Tasmanian Anglican priest, admitted to molesting 10 boys between 1973 and 1993.
His 2005 trial raised allegations of his involvement in an interstate paedophile ring, hearing evidence that another convicted paedophile in Queensland arranged for a youth to be sent to Tasmania to meet Daniels.
Four-year wait for compensation for abuse survivor
There have also been allegations former Tasmanian cleric Hawkins was involved in a paedophile ring.
Steven Fisher, a sexual abuse survivor, told the hearing Devonport rector Hawkins took a special interest in him and cultivated a father-figure relationship with him before the abuse started.
"Sometimes Hawkins treated me with respect and provided me with respect and encouragement, but as soon as I relaxed he would try to take advantage of me," Mr Fisher, who started a victims advocacy group, said.
Hawkins faced trial in 2003 for abusing seven teenage boys and was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison.
Mr Fisher recalled Hawkins associating with members of the Church of England Boys Society.
"Although Hawkins wasn't a CEBS leader himself, he associated with some CEBS leaders, particularly Lou Daniels," he said.
"I remember thinking Hawkins didn't really like Daniels. Hawkins told me I shouldn't join CEBS because it wouldn't be good for me."
Mr Fisher received compensation from the Anglican Church, but told the hearing it was not until four years after the complaint was made.
Paedophile Elliot worked at an exclusive Brisbane Anglican school before becoming a priest.
Former Brisbane Archbishop Peter Hollingsworth resigned as Australia's governor-general in 2003 after it was revealed he allowed Elliott to remain in the church after finding out about the abuse.
In 2011, Jacobs admitted to abusing four boys when he was a youth leader at the CEBS in the 1980s.
The Anglican Church set up the board of inquiry in 2003 to examine allegations of a tri-state paedophile ring operating from the early 1960s into the 1990s.
The royal commission will examine the systems and policies within the CEBS and four Anglican dioceses, in relation to youth camps and activities, and raising and responding to concerns and complaints about child sexual abuse.
Last year, the royal commission found elite Hobart school Hutchins avoided apologising to a child sexual abuse victim to protect its reputation.
Topics: royal-commissions, law-crime-and-justice, anglicans, hobart-7000
First posted
Australian Open: Roger Federer a fan of Nick Kyrgios, says prodigy must make good on talent
Updated
He is in awe of Nick Kyrgios's "sick power", but Roger Federer has urged Australia's mercurial young tennis star not to wind up as a wasted talent.
"I just think the next couple of years are going to be so crucial for him," Federer said while calling for the Australian public to also cut Bernard Tomic some slack.
Federer has been a Kyrgios fan since the pair practised together in Switzerland before the Canberran's breakout run to the Wimbledon quarter-finals in 2014.
"I was already unbelievably impressed at his sheer power, his talent, his potential," said Federer.
"It goes way back. He's enjoyable to watch. I know some people might not like it. I like it. He's got a lot of personality.
It goes way back. He's enjoyable to watch. I know some people might not like it. I like it. He's got a lot of personality. Roger Federer
"(He) might take it (too) far to some extent, but I think he's a great player.
"He's got sick power, and it's going to take him a long way."
Provided Kyrgios - already a two-time grand slam quarter-finalist but set to drop outside the world's top 40 after his third-round Australian Open exit - realises "how important the next couple of years are" and knuckles down.
"Otherwise the train leaves the station and you're maybe not on it," Federer said.
"It would be a pity to waste talent and all that, even more so in this day and age because I feel talent brought you further back in the day.
"Just talking about a guy who has talent and potential, I can't hear it anymore.
"Too many guys have talent. Too many guys are working hard. I don't believe in that very much anymore."
A racquet-smashing tantrum thrower himself early in his grand career, Federer empathises with Kyrgios, whose image has taken a battering over the past six months.
"It just takes time for people to get to know you. I had the same thing," Federer said.
"I felt very misunderstood many times when I was younger.
"I felt like I had to put in a lot of work with the press so they first knew who I was so they could relay the messages to the public, the broader public, the right way.
"So in a way I always feel like it's really interesting and nice to see a youngster grow up in the public eye.
"But then at the same time, you also have the negatives. He's fighting that a little bit.
"But he's doing okay now, better now.
"He needs to, obviously, for what happened last year."
Federer looks to downplay Tomic spat
Meanwhile, Federer has moved to clear up any misunderstanding that has developed with top-ranked Australian Tomic, after Tomic took umbrage at apparent criticism from the Swiss master over not breaking into the top 10.
"I said a lot of things in Brisbane," Federer said.
"I guess only a small part got taken out of it. It's a bit out of context, in my opinion.
"Then you feed it to a player, he reacts, might be frustrated, and then he goes even further.
"I'd like to see anybody succeed and anybody make their move. Especially to top 100 first, top 10, world number one. If everybody could be that, I wish that for everyone.
"To be quite honest, when I walked out of the press room I thought I was somewhat tough, but at the same time I was fair because I said nice things about him.
"I thought he was like 50 or 60 and he was top 20. That was my bad, to be honest.
"But I don't check the rankings every day. I came from the off-season. I had no clue what was going on anymore. That was my bad.
"But I still believe it's a big difference top 10 for a week or for a year or for multiple years, and getting there is not easy.
"It's a lot of dedication, a lot of hard work. There's a lot of guys who have the potential right now, not just him. That's why I think it got brought up in many ways."
AAP/ABC
Topics: tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Lalor Park man 'runs over neighbour' during dispute
Posted
A Sydney man who allegedly used his four-wheel drive to run over his neighbour has been charged with attempted murder.
The 42-year-old victim was taken to hospital in a serious condition after being treated for leg and foot injuries at the scene.
Police said they were called to his Lalor Park home, in Sydney's west, about 7:15pm on Tuesday.
"Emergency services were called to a home on Noakes Parade at Lalor Park following reports of a crash at the location," a NSW Police statement said.
"Officers attached to Blacktown Local Area Command were told a 42-year-old man was allegedly run over by his neighbour's 4WD during a dispute.
"A 24-year-old man attended Blacktown Police Station where he was arrested and charged with attempted murder, intimidation and traffic offences."
The victim was taken to Westmead Hospital and was still in a serious condition this morning, police said.
The accused man is expected to appear at Blacktown Local Court later today.
Topics: crime, lalor-park-2147, sydney-2000
Torrens lake algae treated with hydrogen peroxide
Posted
Hydrogen peroxide has been poured into the Torrens lake in the heart of Adelaide in a trial aimed at reducing blooms of blue-green algae.
It is the first time the chemical, which is found in cleaning products, has been used in Australia as an algal control in a recreational lake.
The trial is being carried out after success in two years of laboratory tests.
Previous efforts to deal with algae in the lake have included pumping extra fresh water into the Torrens.
Water projects officer Katharine Ward said a weak concentration of hydrogen peroxide was being used to keep fish and birdlife safe.
"We find that in the right concentration, the blue-green algae are more susceptible than other aquatic life so it should have minimal impact on the other aquatic life in the Torrens lake," she said.
Adelaide Natural Resources said the algal control method had been successfully used in the United States.
Hydrogen peroxide is used in a stabilised granular form and leaves no chemical residual, it said.
"A full-scale application of hydrogen peroxide to the lake will not be part of the trial, and another flow of fresh water may be needed in coming weeks to manage algal levels in the lake." it said in a statement.
Topics: water-pollution, pollution, environment, water-management, adelaide-5000, sa
Wuman zinc barge 2
Posted
The inside of MMG's Wumna barge, where 10-12mm zinc concentrate pellets are stored for transfer and later dispatched onto an export ship.
Topics: rural, karumba-4891
Digital journalist warns returning students to prepare for online bullying after eight rape threats a day
Updated
A digital journalist is warning parents to prepare their children for bullying on social media as they start the new school year with fresh laptops and mobile devices.
US-based video games journalist Alanah Pearce, originally from Brisbane, regularly receives abuse and rape threats online and said she had several ways of dealing with trolls.
"Sometimes people will send me a message on Facebook and if it's a particularly bad thing I will go to their profile, I'll look through their Facebook [page] and find their family, their work or their school and I'll send them a screenshot of what has been sent to me," she said.
"I'm basically telling someone who I think is an authority figure in that person's life what this person is doing online, so there can be some real [consequences]."
Primary school boy threatened rape
Ms Pearce said she received eight rape threats in one day last week.
She said contacting parents of the offenders was the most effective way of dealing with them.
Once people start to put how depressed they are or how ugly they feel online, then that will attract the trolls. That's why they say 'don't feed the trolls'. Dr Rachael Sharman, University of the Sunshine Coast
"One person in particular I contacted and showed her a rape threat her son had sent me, and he was a very young boy as well; he was only in primary school," she said.
"[His mother] made him hand in his device and took his internet privileges off him for a while.
"[She also] called a meeting with parents at the school to help parents get educated on how kids should act online normally."
Ms Pearce said she struggled to deal with online bullying when a school student but had taught herself to be more resilient.
She suspected trolls were essentially seeking attention so teaching children to ignore them could be very effective.
"Kids care about followers, which needs to be drilled out of them," she said.
No visible reactions, so no consequences says expert
University of the Sunshine Coast lecturer in psychology Dr Rachael Sharman agrees with Ms Pearce's technique of reporting trolls to their parents.
"Part of the issue with social media is you're disconnected; you don't see reaction, so there are no consequences," she said.
"If a 12-year-old boy walked up to a woman and told her he wanted to rape her, he wouldn't get away with it."
She said research had shown many Facebook users struggled to make real relationships offline.
"They've got friends online but don't know how to approach a real person in the real world," Dr Sharman said.
"It's very tricky for the average person, let alone someone on the computer."
Dr Sharman said parents should be aware of their child's social media activity depending on their age.
"I believe the computer or digital device should be in a public room in the home, just to make sure they're not becoming involved in troll [with trolls]," she advised.
She said people who published emotional problems on social media should be particularly concerned about online bullying.
"Once people start to put how depressed they are or how ugly they feel online, then that will attract the trolls," she said.
"That's why they say don't feed the trolls."
Advice for children and parents
Ms Pearce offered the following advice for parents and their children when using social media:
Learn to care less what your followers on social media think
Only follow your close friends on social media rather than everyone in the class or at school
Keep a private profile for people you trust
Parents should actively manage a child's page
Consider using a nickname rather than a real name and do not add a location or an age
Do not respond to trolls
Document every abusive message
Beware of additional content stored in photographs
Give usernames to the school so they can monitor social media
Topics: social-media, secondary-schools, family-and-children, women, primary-schools, maroochydore-4558
First posted
Silos sought in Victoria to be used as sentinels in exotic insect battle
Updated
First it was canaries warning of dangerous gases in underground mines, then bee hives were used to warn of possible pests and disease.
Now farmers across Victoria are being asked to volunteer their silos, to help authorities in the ongoing campaign to keep exotic pests and insects from taking hold.
But not just any silo — the more insects in residence, the better.
Agriculture Victoria's Bio-security officer Jim Moran would prefer the so-called sentinel silos, to be at the lower end of biosecurity safeguards.
"We are after silos that exhibit less than ideal biosecurity practice and have a healthy population of resident insects," Mr Moran said.
"These are the ones that will give us early warning, should an exotic pest arrive."
The silos in question are the kind that house grain for feed and not for sale.
Mr Moran assured farmers that all the information would be treated confidentially.
The silos will house a number of traps that will be checked every three months or so by Agriculture Department officials.
The officials will also check for visual evidence of any possibility of the pests making their home in the silos.
If there is evidence found, then efforts to kill the bugs will be implemented.
With dry conditions currently being experienced in Victoria, there is greater movement of grain around the state as farmers buy in feed.
Therefore Victoria's Bio-security wanted to assess bugs in silos throughout the state, and not just silos that are located near ports.
Every three or four months, the silos would be checked to see if there was any change.
Mr Moran pointed out the honey industry had, for several years, installed hives at places such as ports.
If an exotic pest that could harm the honey industry managed to enter the country the bees in the hives near the entry point would show a reaction, which would alert authorities to take appropriate action.
"As an industry, we need to prove to our overseas customers that we are looking for these bugs," Mr Moran said.
"The Sentinel project could extend out to become permanent."
Topics: agribusiness, agricultural-crops, grain, pests, horsham-3400, ouyen-3490, mildura-3500, wycheproof-3527, wodonga-3690, wangaratta-3677
First posted
Australian Open: Angelique Kerber eliminates Victoria Azarenka to meet Johanna Konta in the semi-finals
Updated
kFree-hitting German Angelique Kerber has sent two-time champion Victoria Azarenka packing from the Australian Open in a quarter-final boilover at Melbourne Park.
The seventh-seeded Kerber reversed a run of six straight losses to Azarenka to eliminate the Belarusian 6-3, 7-5 at Rod Laver Arena.
Kerber will play Johanna Konta in the semi-finals after the Brit defeated China's Shuai Zhang in their quarter-final match.
While seeded higher than Azarenka - who spiralled down the rankings during an injury-plagued 2014 season - Kerber was a big underdog on Wednesday after being crushed by the former world number one in the Brisbane final earlier this month.
It extended Azarenka's undefeated record against Kerber and the Belarusian continued to march on at Melbourne Park, failing to drop a set in her first four rounds.
"I can't actually describe it in words. I mean, I was zero from six before I came to court," Kerber said.
Women's quarter-final results Serena Williams [1] d Maria Sharapova [5] 6-4, 6-1

Agnieszka Radwanska [4] d Carla Suarez Navarro [10] 6-1, 6-3

Angelique Kerber [7] d Victoria Azarenka [14] 6-3, 7-5

Johanna Konta d Shuai Zhang 6-4, 6-1
"I was just saying play like you do on the practice courts and just go for it, just believe that you can beat her and I'm so, so happy that I beat her for the first time."
Kerber set the tone by breaking Azarenka in the opening game of the match.
The German rifled a running forehand pass to claim the double break, surging to a 4-0 lead before Azarenka managed to get on the scoreboard.
But once she did, Azarenka was hard to stop.
The Belarusian broke Kerber for the first time and edged back to 4-3 as the German began to doubt.
In a big service hold, the seventh seed dug in to save another four break points to move to 5-3.
Azarenka quickly fell 0-40 behind in the next game and saved two set points but not a third as Kerber converted early dominance to have the two-time champion under the pump for the first time all summer.
Having conceded only 11 games in her first four rounds, suddenly Azarenka had dropped her first set of the year.
But she responded in style, breaking Kerber in the opening game of the second set to seize back the momentum.
Azarenka powered to a 5-2, 40-0 lead, only to blow five set points as the free-wheeling German roared back to take the set and the match after one hour and 45 minutes.
Konta too strong for Zhang
Konta became the first British woman to reach a major semi-final in 33 years with her win over Zhang.
The 24-year-old English woman moved up 100 ranking places in the second half of 2015 to reach the world number 47 spot before the Australian Open.
Her previous best result at a major was a fourth-round finish at the US Open last year.
Zhang, ranked 133 in the world, also achieved a career best result at Melbourne Park but was no match for the strong service game of Konta.
Sydney-born Konta served seven aces to Zhang's none and won 79 per cent of her first serves.
AAP/ABC
Topics: australian-open, tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Child sexual abuse royal commission: Victim says he was abused 'because of' Brisbane Archbishop Phillip Aspinall
Posted
A royal commission witness in Hobart has blamed now-Archbishop of Brisbane Phillip Aspinall for the abuse he suffered at the hands of a convicted paedophile.
Key points: The witness, known as BYF, was a youth group member along with now-Archbishop Phillip Aspinall
BYF says he told Mr Aspinall of concerns about rector Garth Hawkins
BYF says, while staying with Hawkins, Mr Aspinall volunteered him up to sleep in Hawkins' bed
BYF told the hearing he was raped that night by Hawkins
The Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse is examining responses to sexual abuse allegations in the Church of England Boys Society (CEBS), which is run through the Anglican Church.
The witness known as BYF said he was heavily involved in Anglican Church youth groups and told the hearing it was common for youth group members to stay on floors in rectories or people's homes while travelling.
BYF told the commission he stayed at the rectory with Tasmanian rector Garth Hawkins while travelling with another youth, Phillip Aspinall, who is now Archbishop of Brisbane.
The hearing heard he and Mr Aspinall were sleeping on the floor when Hawkins came into the room, sat next to BYF and ran his fingers through his hair, telling him he was good looking and offering for him to sleep in his bed.
BYF refused.
He told the hearing the next day he discussed the advance with Mr Aspinall, who had been awake and part of the conversation.
Some time later BYF was travelling with another person through Triabunna on Tasmania's east coast, where Hawkins had been moved.
Mr Aspinall and some other boys from Hobart were staying at the rectory and going sailing the next day.
BYF told the hearing he was invited to stay at the rectory and go sailing, and the boys all slept on the floor of the living room.
He's the one who said, 'I want you to go into his bed', and that's why I was abused, because of Archbishop Aspinall. Abuse victim BYF
BYF said Hawkins came into the living room that night and offered for one of the boys to sleep in his bed.
He said Mr Aspinall volunteered him and "made a big thing of it", saying he felt he had to go with Hawkins and "did not want to look daft".
BYF told the hearing that night he was forced to perform oral sex and was anally raped by Hawkins.
"I couldn't believe that after I'd told Aspinall my concerns, he would deliberately send me to Hawkins' bed," BYF said.
The hearing heard BYF later told Mr Aspinall that Hawkins had "done something" to him, and he was dismissive and ignored it.
Under cross-examination from Archbishop Aspinall's lawyer, BYF continued to blame him.
"He put me in that bed, he made that decision after I'd told him that I was concerned that Hawkins was going to abuse me," BYF said.
"He's the one who said, 'I want you to go into his bed', and that's why I was abused, because of Archbishop Aspinall."
Topics: royal-commissions, law-crime-and-justice, sexual-offences, hobart-7000, brisbane-4000, adelaide-5000
Far north Queensland's newest Australian citizens celebrate 'dream come true'
Updated
Ask the average Australian what it means to be a citizen and you are likely to be given 1,001 reasons Australia is the best country in the world; ask a newly naturalised Australian citizen and they will give you 1,002.
The Merriman family, England
Originally from Rochdale in north-west England, the Merriman family first visited Australia in 2008.
"We had family already in Australia and we decided to come out for a holiday to see what the fuss was all about, because we'd heard it was so fantastic," Ms Merriman said.
We're here, we're here to stay and we'll carry on contributing to the country. Debbie Merriman
Like so many before them, the Merriman family fell in love with Australia on their holiday and after 15 months of paperwork and agonising, made the move to Cairns.
"As a family we all decided that we love Cairns the most," Ms Merriman said.
"If we were going to sell our house, leave our good jobs and move to the other side of the world, it had to be for a life-changing lifestyle and Cairns offers that to us."
Moving from one side of the world to the other is not without its challenges, and being close to family and friends tops the list of things the Merrimans miss about their former home.
"But, nowadays with Skype and the internet its not as far away as it used to be years ago," Mr Merriman said.
"We see our family and friends every week or every couple of weeks."
Family aside, Australia has given the Merrimans the lifestyle they desired, and just about everything else they could have wanted in an adopted home.
Now with their citizenship papers firmly in hand, they are celebrating what Australia has done for them and say they look forward to see what they can do for it.
"It's given us a lovely place to live, good jobs, good schooling and good friends," Ms Merriman said.
"We're just really proud to become Australian and say that we are part of the community.
"We're here to stay and we'll carry on contributing to the country."
Anoj Thapa, Nepal
Anoj Thapa left Nepal in 2008 to further his studies in Australia and now lives in the tourist hotspot of Palm Cove, north of Cairns.
In Australia, Mr Thapa found more than just the lifestyle he was looking for, he also found love and is now married with a baby boy.
"After my son was born in 2013 we wanted to move to a nice, peaceful place and we found Cairns, especially Palm Cove, has that," Mr Thapa said.
With his growing family's support, Mr Thapa has managed to carve out a career as a chef in Palm Cove.
"I was a full-time student back home and couldn't really find what I wanted to do," he said.
"When I came here I chose hospitality to become a chef, and I'm proud to do that."
With a family and a career to think about, Mr Thapa rarely finds time to reflect on his native land; but when he does, it is with fondness.
"I definitely miss Nepal. It's my birth country so I'll always miss it for that," he said.
"But I miss my family and my friends the most."
Mr Thapa's life has changed immeasurably since his arrival in Australia and said becoming a citizen of his adopted country was something he was more than happy about.
"I have no words to explain it, it means a lot to me," he said.
"Being a citizen of one of the biggest countries in the world, one of the most developed countries in the world, to be a part of it I'm feeling really proud."
Fernanda Astolfo, Brazil
Leaving behind a career as a lawyer in Sao Paolo, Brazil, Fernanda Astolfo came to Australia to study English for a year in 2008.
Choosing to live in a climate not dissimilar to that of her native land, Ms Astolfo settled on Cairns and soon found love.
I'm already Australian by the heart so this is like getting to 110 per cent Fernanda Astolfo
"After staying here for almost two years I met my partner and now here I am after eight years," Ms Astolfo laughed.
Although she is a qualified lawyer in Brazil, Miss Astolfo works as a restaurant supervisor in Cairns's bustling hospitality industry.
"I started out as a waitress and worked up to being a supervisor," she said.
"But in February I'm starting my law degree at James Cook University."
Among the things she misses about home, Ms Astolfo said family, friends and authentic Brazilian food topped her list.
"I really enjoy all the different cuisines in Australia, because there are a lot of influences from the French, Italians and Japanese," she said.
"There's a little bit of Brazillian [influence] but hopefully in the future there'll be a little bit more."
Living in Australia for eight years has already had an impact on Ms Astolfo's life, but becoming an Australian citizen is among the greatest.
"I'm already Australian by the heart, so this is like getting to 110 per cent," she said.
"I'm having my dream come true to be living in Australia and enjoying my life."
Topics: australia-day, immigration, multiculturalism, people, cairns-4870, palm-cove-4879, brazil, england, nepal
First posted
Police dismantle hydroponic drug setup at Adelong
Posted
Police have seized drugs and drug manufacturing equipment during a raid on a property in Adelong.
Officers executed a search warrant at a storage facility, next to a home on Gilmore St, on Tuesday afternoon.
During the search, officers discovered a hydroponic drug lab in the storage facility.
Police estimate the equipment that was uncovered is valued at about $20,000.
During the search they also located and seized one kilogram of cannabis, and fireworks.
A 36-year-old woman, the owner of the property, is currently assisting police with their investigation.
Police are appealing to the public for more information.
Topics: drugs-and-substance-abuse, drug-offences, adelong-2729
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Man who killed Ronald Donaldson with sledgehammer 'refused to wash victim's blood off'
Updated
A man who killed another man in a frenzied attack with a sledgehammer refused to wash the victim's blood off his face before a police interview, a Darwin court has heard.
The inquest into the death of Ronald "Speedy" Donaldson, 69, heard he died from blunt head trauma after being repeatedly hit with the weapon in December 2013.
Mr Donaldson was working as a fencing contractor in Ryan Park in Katherine when he was attacked in a case of mistaken identity by a "delusional" Justin Osbourne.
In 2014, Osborne, 40, was found not guilty of Mr Donaldson's murder by reason of mental impairment.
A psychiatrist said Osborne had undiagnosed and untreated schizophrenia.
The judge ordered he be detained in Darwin prison under a custodial supervision order, which will be periodically reviewed.
Detective Senior Sergeant Lee Morgan, who investigated the crime, told the court the interview with Mr Osborne was the "most bizarre" interview he had ever been involved in.
He said Mr Osborne had blood spattered all over his face when he was arrested by police.
"We encouraged him to take a shower, but he was adamant he didn't want to wash himself," Sergeant Morgan told the court.
I think it's appropriate the general public know, sometimes the killers are not in the right mind to be dealt with by criminal processes, with 20 years behind bars Greg Cavanagh, Northern Territory Coroner
Coroner Greg Cavanagh described the day time killing as horrific, outrageous and terrifying.
He said one of reasons for the inquest was to look at public health and safety issues.
"I think it's appropriate the general public know, sometimes the killers are not in the right mind to be dealt with by criminal processes, with 20 years behind bars," he said.
Counsel assisting the coroner Jodi Truman said Osborne had been living on the Sunshine Coast in Queensland, and came to be in Katherine by mere circumstance.
Osborne had been on a road trip from Brisbane to Geraldton in Western Australia with a man he met whilst in a Brisbane.
He was left behind in Katherine after having a fight with the driver, Les Pearce, at a service station.
Giving evidence via video link from Bunbury prison in Western Australia, Pearce said Osborne had tried to kill him in an unprovoked attack.
"He king hit me in the right ear and straight after that both hands were around my throat trying to strangle me," he said.
Nurse unaware of mental health issues
After the fight with Pearce, Osborne was treated at Katherine Hospital for abrasions.
The nurse, Leo Gregor, gave evidence at the inquest saying that while he thought Osborne's behaviour odd, nothing had made him think Osborne had mental health issues.
The court heard that after Osborne left hospital, he came across Mr Donaldson in Ryan Park about 11.15am, who was fixing a fence.
Osborne was "delusional", Ms Truman said, and mistook Mr Donaldson for Pearce.
He grabbed the victim in a headlock, forced him to the ground and began kicking him.
"Mr Osborne picked up a metal sledge hammer that was located close by, in the back of Mr Donaldson's utility," she said.
Osborne struck the victim at least five times with the weapon, which was 40 centimetres long and weighed 2.2 kilograms.
The court also heard evidence that Osborne's mother had said her son had been a heavy user of illicit substances for a long period of time, particularly cannabis and amphetamines.
Topics: murder-and-manslaughter, mental-health, katherine-0850
First posted
Lend an arm: Australian Red Cross Blood Service's quest for 650 Riverina donors
Posted
More than 90 per cent of Australia's eligible blood donors are yet to give their first donation, according to the Australian Red Cross Blood Service (ARCBS).
The Australian Red Cross Blood Service has set an ambitious target to recruit 115,000 new blood donors nationwide this year.
ARCBS New South Wales representative Jemma Falkenmire said there were plenty of eligible donors.
"Of the nine million Australians who are eligible to donate, only around 500,000 of them are blood donors," Ms Falkenmire said.
The Riverina will be expected to shoulder some of the burden to provide new donors.
The ARCBS is looking for 650 new donors from the Riverina this year.
"We're doing a lot of work in the community talking to schools and businesses, and people will certainly see us out in the public encouraging people to donate," Ms Falkenmire said.
Despite the need for extra donors in the Riverina, the service does not intend to reopen the Griffith donor centre, which closed in 2014.
Griffith residents are now served by a mobile blood collection unit, which visits the town every few months.
Locals have complained that is not always convenient, especially for those who work business hours.
"For us, being everywhere is not the answer to collect donations. We need to work with limited resources we have," Ms Falkenmire said.
"We always have free appointments [in Wagga] for people to donate," she said.
"We do understand not everyone will be able to give blood ... but we really need to remind people that we don't have enough people keeping supplies flowing at those critical times of year," Ms Falkenmire said.
A first time blood donation takes about an hour, mainly for paperwork and interviews.
The blood collection itself process takes about 5-10 minutes.
Topics: blood, community-and-society, wagga-wagga-2650
Workers worried about lack of start date at Moe abattoir
Posted
There is growing concern about the future of an abattoir at Moe in Victoria.
Tabro Meats is a Chinese-owned meat processor with two meatworks in Gippsland.
Both have been shut for maintenance, and while workers at Tabro's Wonthaggi meatworks have been informed of a reopening date, the Meat Industry Union said those at the Moe plant had not.
The union's Paul Conway has spoken to Tabro management at a number of meetings, and said workers at the Moe plant were concerned.
"Cattle prices have been very high," Mr Conway said.
"The 80 workers at Moe were initially told there would only be a week's break, and then they would commence operating again.
"However, the start day came and went, they hadn't started work, and then we were told the new start date was around the 11th of January, then that came and went, and we were starting to get more and more frustrated, workers calling us asking what was going on."
Mr Conway said workers at Wonthaggi had been promised it would restart operations on February 3, but no date had been set for the Moe plant.
"The only thing you can add is that the company has spent a lot of money on capital works and improvement, so you would expect that they were serious [about their interest in the industry], but I just don't think they fully understand our markets and the seasonal nature and how that drives prices," he said.
The ABC has contacted Tabro meats for a response.
Topics: agricultural-prices, beef-cattle, sheep-production, wonthaggi-3995, moe-3825
What do producers need to know to tap into export markets and make the most of free trade agreements?
Man dies after diving into pool at Australia Day party in Girraween
Updated
A 20-year-old man has died after hitting his head while diving into a pool at an Australia Day party in Darwin's rural area.
The man was knocked unconscious during the incident at Girraween.
Fellow partygoers tried to resuscitate the man as they waited for paramedics to arrive.
St John's Ambulance crew also tried to resuscitate the man but he died just after 4.00pm.
Northern Territory Police said about 100 people were at the party.
Man robbed on beach popular with nudists
Elsewhere, a 59-year-old man enjoying a beer on a Darwin beach was allegedly assaulted and robbed.
Darwin Police are looking for three people who stole the man's backpack while he was sitting on Casuarina Free Beach, which is a popular spot for nudists.
The man was threatened with empty beer bottles when he refused to hand over alcohol and cigarettes.
Police said the man's wallet, phone and beer was stolen when two men and a woman ran off with his backpack.
One of the alleged thieves was wearing an Australian flag bandana.
Topics: crime, armed-robbery, darwin-0800
First posted
A dream come true: Life on board Newcastle's rescue helicopter
Posted
In the world of emergency medicine, every second is critical as to whether a patient lives or dies.
For Newcastle anaesthetist Dr Rob Bartolacci, it is that adrenaline and a passion for flying that melds perfectly in his role as a doctor on board the Hunter region's rescue helicopter.
Dressed in a navy-coloured flying suit and with a helmet tucked under his arm, Dr Bartolacci has a strong presence.
But when the doctor speaks, he is affable, cool, calm and driven.
"I've always been a bit of a frustrated pilot," he said. "Before I went to medical school I wanted to do flying school.
"I could spend all day in the air and be a happy man. The combination of medicine and flying is ideal for me."
Training the key to success
Dr Bartolacci, 52, grew up and studied his undergraduate degree in Sydney.
His career as a 'chopper doc' began in Sydney in 1991, and he became an anaesthetist in 1997.
He began with Newcastle's rescue helicopter in March 2014 after new protocols were put in place to allow doctors to travel in the helicopter to incidents.
Dr Bartolacci's life is at times a juggling act.
In between his family life and helicopter roster (alternating between 10-hour days and 14-hour night shifts), Dr Bartolacci also maintains roles in local hospitals.
"It's just a matter of organising that we're well rested before we come to shift, especially on night duty, and that we don't have any clinical responsibilities the day after a night shift," Dr Bartolacci said of the routine.
"I'm fairly organised, so I always make sure I've got my time off before and after duty."
The shift begins
A shift with the rescue helicopter begins with a routine of checking equipment.
It's good to be a little bit afraid because it keeps you on the ball. Dr Rob Bartolacci, rescue helicopter doctor
The crew is briefed on the day's weather and available airports should they be needed.
A training topic is then studied, something that is essential.
Then the waiting game for a callout begins.
"[Callouts] can be anything really; anything from a child drowning in a backyard pool to a paraglider on a cliff, to a person gored by an animal ... the spectrum is completely open," Dr Bartolacci said.
"On average there's at least one callout per shift.
"Obviously there are some days that are busier than others, and weekends are the ones where you might get three or four [callouts] in a shift."
A confronting job
Over his career, Dr Bartolacci has seen many confronting emergencies.
It was only a few years ago that he was faced with the fear of not returning home alive.
His helicopter crew was sent to rescue an injured patient from Claustral Canyon in the Blue Mountains.
Last light was approaching and the chopper was low on fuel.
Dr Bartolacci and a paramedic were winched into the canyon and were forced to stay there overnight with the patient.
"It was raining heavily and the canyon filled with water, so we had to move twice to avoid being washed away," he said.
"It was probably one of the few times that I ever thought I was in a situation where I wasn't going to come home."
Dealing with confronting experiences is a necessary part of the job, and Dr Bartolacci said the camaraderie between the helicopter crews was imperative.
"You wouldn't be human if some things didn't affect you, and I think the things that personally [affect me] is if it's a little close to home," Dr Bartolacci said.
"We're all human, so we all have emotions. It's a matter of controlling them.
"Stupidly, I don't particularly like heights. However, it's something that just makes me make sure that I do all my checks properly, so that I'm secure in knowing that if I'm on the end of the winch cable and about to be dispatched out of the aircraft, that I'm safe.
"It's good to be a little bit afraid because it keeps you on the ball, but there really isn't any room for those emotions to overwhelm your decision making or interfere with the task at hand."
'This is my relaxation'
Dr Bartolacci said the role was a physically demanding one, but also highly rewarding.
"Every day is a good day [in this job]," he said.
"If we don't get called, it's a good day for somebody else; if we do get called, then it's a bit more exciting for us.
"Some people play golf for relaxation, and it sounds stupid, but this is my relaxation.
"For me personally, it's a dream come true ... it's something I'm very proud of, and I'd do it for nothing if I had to."
Topics: doctors-and-medical-professionals, broadmeadow-2292, newcastle-2300
'Leave Port Stephens Alone': public forum to discuss council amalgamations
Posted
A public meeting is being held in Port Stephens tonight against the New South Wales Government's proposed amalgamation with Newcastle Council.
The Leave Port Stephens Alone forum will give locals the opportunity to hear from councillors and resident groups that oppose the merger plan.
Some concerned locals say they will struggle to have their voices heard as part of a bigger council, and worry ratepayer funds will be wasted on Newcastle-centric projects.
I wanted to get the community together...just so that we can discuss and give voice to some of the concerns. Kate Washington, Port Stephens MP
Port Stephens MP Kate Washington has organised the forum, and said she was looking forward to hearing what everyone has to say.
"It's an opportunity for the community to get a good understanding of the process that we're in, in terms of the amalgamation, and what they can do to express their opposition to it if they choose to," Ms Washington said.
Newcastle had originally been slated for a merger with neighbouring Lake Macquarie Council, before Port Stephens was deemed "unfit" to stand alone.
Ms Washington said tonight's community forum was the perfect opportunity for all parties to make their opinions known.
"The delegate has a public inquiry that's going to be held on February 4," she said.
"I wanted to get the community together before we have that meeting, just so that we can discuss and give voice to some of the concerns, so that people can then focus their energy at that meeting and for the purpose of their submissions."
Topics: local-government, state-parliament, raymond-terrace-2324, newcastle-2300
Two die in Australia Day collision near Wagga Wagga
Posted
Two men have died after a head-on collision between two cars at Gregadoo, east of Wagga Wagga in the New South Wales Riverina.
Emergency services were called to the Gregadoo Road just after 12:30pm (AEST) on Australia Day and said one of the vehicles had caught alight.
The driver, a 56-year-old man, died at the scene.
A passenger in the other vehicle, an 88-year-old man, also died.
The driver of the second vehicle, a 72-year-old man, has been airlifted to the St George Hospital in Sydney, where he remains in a serious but stable condition.
Police say all three men are from Wagga Wagga.
Investigations into the collision remain ongoing and anyone with information is urged to contact the Wagga Police Station.
A report will be prepared for the Coroner.
Topics: road, police, regional, wagga-wagga-2650
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
A day in the life of an outback school chaplain in rural Queensland
Updated
Chris and Sarah Guise's daily commute to work can range from walking across the street to driving for hours to a tiny primary school based on a remote cattle property.
The couple are school chaplains in Hughenden, 400 kilometres west of Townsville, in north west Queensland, and service the Hughenden, Prairie and Cameron Downs State Schools.
They have been in the rural community for about 18 months providing support to students, teachers and people in the wider community.
Chaplains are required to have experience and qualifications in youth work, and Mr Guise said many came from teaching, psychology or ministry backgrounds.
Originally from New Zealand, Chris and Sarah Guise have lived around Queensland with their four, now grown up, children. They have worked in IT, ministry and in lawyers and doctors' offices, but this is their first posting as chaplains.
On an average day they might help with extra curricular activities, hands-on in the classroom or offer social and emotional support to students. Mrs Guise also runs playgroups in Prairie and Hughenden.
It's really supporting their education and helping them make good choices and good decisions. Hughenden chaplain Sarah Guise
"One of the most important things a chaplain can do is just be there as a listening ear and I think evidence would show that is one of the key things that helps support people who are starting to feel stressed," Mr Guise said.
"Here in the outback of course we've got a lot of people who are feeling very very stressed because of the lack of the rain and the destocking of properties and that filters down to kids as well in the classroom."
Mr Guise stressed that their work had no religious agenda and they supported students of all religions, races, genders and sexual orientations.
They talk to kids regularly about behavioural issues, stress, study and bullying as well as more serious issues like abuse.
"We're not the disciplinarian in the school and sometimes some kids don't get along with their teachers," Mrs Guise said.
"To have someone who can say 'Miss said I have to do this and I don't want to' and for a Chappy to say 'hey, you know what, would it really hurt if you did do this? How can I help you do it?' — it's really supporting their education and helping them make good choices and good decisions.
"Sometimes they can't reflect on their poor choices because they're just kids, they need a listening ear and they need help."
Covering large distances and a variety of issues
Mrs Guise said the greatest challenge of their role was the distance.
Every Monday she visits Cameron Downs State School, a small primary school based on a remote cattle property 70 kilometres south of Hughenden along a gravel road.
"That's unique with Cameron Downs because of course you need a four-wheel-drive [vehicle]," she said.
"If it rains you can't get from town to there — also you really have to watch around from two o'clock in the afternoon if there's any rain coming.
"If there are teachers who are from out of town, you have to just get in your car and go — and all the parents will swarm to the school grab their kids because otherwise they're sleeping over."
Unlike chaplains in the city, their role extends beyond the local schools.
We talk to the child in their language about 'we really want you to be safe at school and also at home and anywhere else you go and from what you're saying to me, you might need some help'. Hughenden chaplain Sarah Guise
Mr Guise said he made an effort to make himself know outside of the school community when he first arrived.
"People have been really open and welcoming and really embraced us as part of the community," he said.
"That's been rewarding in itself because then you start to open up conversations outside of the school as well ... there's parents and then there's grandparents and then there's people who know those people.
"Word gets around pretty quickly and you find the community knows who we are and they are watching they do."
Now, people in the community know where they live and that they are welcome to drop by if they need help.
"[If] Aunty's going away and the kids are at home and there's no food in the cupboard,they know where we live and they'll knock on the door and say 'Mrs Chappy, Aunty's not back until Monday, do you have anything?' ... so we'll just go to the pantry and grab a few bits and pieces," Mrs Guise said..
Mrs Guise said all their conversations with students, staff and community members were confidential.
But if a child or student approaches them about a serious issue, they are obligated to report that to the principal.
"First of all we listen and we listen until they are done and it's really hard because we're parents and we're humans and it breaks our heart," she said.
"But what we need to do is we talk to the child in their language about 'we really want you to be safe at school and also at home and anywhere else you go and from what you're saying to me, you might need some help'.
"What is really amazing is that when there's a serious issue they trust that we've got their best interests [at heart] — so if we're referring to a counsellor or if we're referring to Headspace or Beyond Blue or to a doctor or nurse they know that we care.
"We are not going to send them to someone who is going to gossip or is going to cause a problem," Mrs Guise said.
Topics: community-organisations, community-education, community-development, primary-schools, public-schools, secondary-schools, counselling, hughenden-4821
First posted
Riverland plum grower invites pick your own to avoid waste and selling at a loss
Posted
In the midst of a bumper crop, a Renmark fruit grower has taken the unusual step of advertising for members for the public to pick their own fruit from his plum trees and then buy it from him at a heavily discounted rate.
While it sounds like an innovative approach to sell fruit, in reality, it is to stop the organically grown plums from dropping to the ground to rot.
The Loxton family said their Tarcoola Street fruit block would run at a loss if they paid pickers and tried to sell the fruit at what the market was paying.
Brad Loxton said he had spoken to one of the big supermarket chains and to agents who bought for some of the markets in Adelaide, and said he was offered $8 for a 10-kilogram box of his plums, which was not enough to cover his costs.
"If you're getting $8, you've got to pay $2 for the box and another couple of dollars for your freight, there's not really too much left there, so you definitely couldn't afford to pay pickers," he said.
"I'm not really too worried about that, I just don't want to see them drop on the ground."
To try to prevent the plums going to waste, his daughter Natalie has advertised for members of the public to come and pick their own and then purchase them at a discounted rate.
She said 200 out of the farm's 600 plum trees, were heavily laden with fruit and ready for picking now.
"Dad and I, we can't pick 200 trees, it's not going to happen before they drop," she said.
Saying her father was an "optimist", Ms Loxton said the reality was that in around five days' time, the plums would go to waste.
"No matter how fast I pick, I've only got two hands and there are just too many trees," she said.
"So I had the idea that maybe inviting people from the public in to come and have a look at what we're doing and pick some fruit, it would really help us out.
"It's not just moving the product for us but it's also providing those extra sets of hands."
Mr Loxton said the method worked with strawberry farms interstate and was becoming popular in Canada.
"It's called You Pick, and it's pretty popular," he said.
While the farm was not organically certified, Mr Loxton said he was committed to keeping the process as natural as possible.
"I don't have to use sprays on the plums, I'm trying to be a bit organic. I've got sheep running under the plums, so you've got your fertiliser there," he said.
Four years ago, Brad gave up his job driving buses in Adelaide, and returned to the Riverland where he grew up.
There was no money in the fruit block, he said, but he still considered himself lucky because his wife had a well-paid job that supplemented the farm.
Natalie has three university degrees and had a well-paid job in the mining industry, but recently found herself out of work because of a down-turn in that sector.
Difficult times for Riverland fruit growers
The Loxtons are hoping anyone who does come to the property to pick their fruit will also gain an appreciation for the time that goes into high quality produce and for the situation Riverland growers are facing.
"It has become very difficult for the small-time fruit blocker to turn economic," Ms Loxton said.
"It's about trying to find the right market for this kind of produce because at the moment you're just competing with everybody and everyone out there."
"So we have been selling to the middle man at this point and they're knocking us down to a $1 a kilo or 80 cents a kilo and once you take out the 20 cents a kilo for the box and 20 cents for the freight, you haven't got a viable business at all."
The Loxtons are currently crunching the numbers to see if they can cover production costs by taking the fruit to the market themselves.
Ms Loxton said it was devastating when farmers were paying for the privilege to work, and she urged consumers to support growers by buying South Australian, and buying direct from the grower.
"You know, when you're talking about a farming industry, what's that worth to Australia?" she said.
"What are we losing by making it so that farmers can't actually continue? Or have enough in retirement, or have an outside income in order to support a farm."
"It's not just the plums, it's not just the grapes, when the government has got the flood gates wide open to importation, there's only two things that can happen and by bringing in things so much cheaper from overseas, the only alternative for us is to keep pace with that."
The Loxtons are hoping common sense will prevail, and quality will win out for customers.
"You won't get better plums anywhere in the world than what I've got, straight off the tree here," Mr Loxton said.
Topics: fruit, agricultural-crops, rural, renmark-5341, sa
Australian business delegation visits Syrian refugee camps in Lebanon and Turkey as part of Friendly Nation initiative
Updated
A member of an Australian business delegation visiting Syrian refugee camps in Turkey and Lebanon has urged Australia to boost its resettlement target to as many as 30,000 people.
Key points: Australian business keen to find jobs and give training to Syrians resettling in Australia
Tony Shepherd of the delegation urges Australia to boost intake to as many as 30,000
Refugees do not seek pity but want to contribute, delegation members say
A range of Australian companies and business organisations are involved in the Friendly Nation initiative, and are keen to provide jobs and training for about 12,000 Syrian refugees who will be resettled in Australia.
Former head of the Business Council of Australia Tony Shepherd is travelling with the delegation and would like to see Australia further increase its Syrian refugee intake.
"I think Australia and the rest of the developed world is going to have to step up to the plate and increase the number of resettled refugees they're prepared to take," he told Radio National, urging Australia to consider boosting its intake to as many as 30,000 people.
"[Past] refugees have made an enormous contribution to Australia.
"I think it's within our economic and humane capacity to do it. We believe that business should enter the compact and offer the jobs and training that these people need."
Another delegation member, Adelaide businessman Ian Smith, said there were many professional people among those now in the camps and families would face bleak prospects unless other nations stepped up to help.
"We've had the most remarkable and actually privileged insights to these people," he told 891 ABC Adelaide.
"Quite frankly they're just like all of us — there are many professional people, there are those who have been working in trades, there are those who are elderly, there are those who are young — just a broad cross-section of people who have been ravaged by devastation, by cruelty and [we are] really looking to how can we lend a hand to their rehabilitation one way or another."
'These people are not looking for pity'
Mr Smith said he had met Syrian people who saw family members brutally killed and others who were now without their breadwinner.
"But these people are not looking for pity, these people are looking to contribute and the overwhelming feeling we have had is if they can come here, or they can go to other countries, they can contribute," he said.
"But if they could have any wish it would be to go back to a peaceful Syria."
Mr Shepherd said Turkey and Lebanon were struggling to cope with the influx.
"The crisis is far worse than we even expected from the news reports we have seen — 4.6 million refugees have left Syria, been forced out of Syria, they've lost everything, family members and friends, they've got no resources," he said.
"Poor Lebanon, a country of four million, has got [up to] 1.3 million refugees crammed into it, Turkey's been extremely generous, they've taken in another million refugees.
"Neither country is in a position where it can sustain this sort of support indefinitely. It's a pretty desperate situation."
Topics: refugees, community-and-society, immigration, programs-and-initiatives, government-and-politics, australia, sa, lebanon, turkey, syrian-arab-republic, adelaide-5000
First posted
Police praise Tamworth Country Music Festival attendees
Posted
Tamworth Police say the behaviour of Country Music Festival attendees this year greatly improved on previous years.
The festival brings visitors from all over the state, country and world, to the northern New South Wales town.
Chief Inspector Jeff Budd said the majority of people had a good time, but there were a few incidents of theft, and police had to move young people on from shopping centres, after complaints from centre management.
He said there had been a handful of positive drug driving tests but "nothing startling", and the number of people caught driving under the influence was well down on past years.
"[There were] six PCA's for the event that we recorded, so that was really good," Chief Inspector Budd said.
"Going back to the days five and six years ago we were up towards the 50 mark, so that's really impressive and people are driving safely, which is really great."
The Liquor Accord's ID scanning system for licensed venues had its first big test during festival, and Chief Inspector Budd said it passed with flying colours.
The system came online in October last year.
"The scanners in Tamworth have been accepted really well," he said.
"For the patrons it's almost like having a selfie every night and they're really embracing that.
"It's been great, it puts those who want to misbehave on notice that the venues can deal with them quickly and they can be identified quickly.
"We've had no issues as a result."
Topics: country, music, arts-and-entertainment, community-and-society, community-and-multicultural-festivals, tamworth-2340
Why you should stop feeding native birds at your house
Posted
By welcoming king parrots, rosellas or lorikeets to your house for feeding, you are serving up a diet of junk food, and reducing their ability to forage for food, authorities warn.
Part of the enjoyment of living in a regional area with garden space is creating a habitat for our native animals in the backyard.
But while birdbaths and frog ponds provide a useful service for native species, a bird feeder full of seed does not.
The issue is so serious that the NSW Office of Environment and Heritage has published an information document called 'Keep wildlife wild: please don't feed the animals'.
The department warns against welcoming in native birds and conditioning them into regular feeding.
"When you feed native animals you're giving them the wildlife equivalent of junk food," the publication said.
"Instead of eating a wide range of natural foods, they depend on processed seeds, bread and other foods that are not part of their natural diet. This can make them very sick.
"Animals that expect to be fed by people can become aggressive, harassing people for food when they are hungry."
The department warns that birds will then return to the food source, potentially displacing other species and their migratory patterns.
Stories from people living in the Illawarra
Callers to the 97.3 ABC Illawarra Morning show today were unanimous in condemning feeding native birds, after presenter Nick Rheinberger said two king parrots had visited his house in the Southern Highlands.
"I have a huge chook pen that is not covered on the top and I have to hide my chook feed [from king parrots] so my chooks can eat their food," Jen from the Southern Highlands said.
"Don't feed the birds — yes they're beautiful, and I can touch them in the gum tree, but it's easy food, it's like McDonalds for them.
"Native birds eat totally different food."
Caller Daryl said by feeding birds you were taking them away from their natural instincts.
"In suburbia it's a no-no because it brings in all sorts of other birds, like the myna, sea gulls and other pests."
Tony from Mount Keira said that even when he stopped feedings birds on his property, sulphur crested cockatoos still returned occasionally to look for seeds.
"They get used to getting food and when they don't, they tear everything else apart and drive the other birds away."
How feeding wild birds can kill them
The Office of Environment and Heritage said that by feeding birds, a moment's pleasure for you could turn into a junk food addiction for the bird.
They even pointed out that feeding lorikeets sugar-based foods like fruit, could cause the birds to die at an unusually young age.
Research by the Office of Environment and Heritage found that an outbreak of lorikeets dying in large numbers for no apparent reason, was caused by a disease associated with poor hygiene and an inadequate diet.
Scientists directed the blame at the type of food they were being fed by humans, and unsanitary feeders.
The department said you could attract natural wildlife to your garden by planting trees, such as hakeas, acacias, casuarinas and eucalyptus, which all provide natural food for visiting birds.
Topics: birds, wollongong-2500
Sydney man remanded over spate of random attacks
Updated
A man charged with assaulting four men in random attacks in Sydney's south-west will stay behind bars for at least a week.
Ricky Hema, 35, is accused of assaulting four strangers within the space of two hours at Punchbowl, Belfield and Campsie on Sunday.
Burwood Local Court heard he was also charged with two counts of assault, occasioning actual bodily harm and causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
Hema allegedly punched a 46-year-old man in the face at a bar on Rossmore Avenue, Punchbowl, about 1.30pm.
He also allegedly kicked and punched a 72-year-old, who had to be taken to Bankstown Hospital where he received stitches to the top of his head and treatment for pain to his ribs.
Later that same day, Hema was in a car park at a block of units in Campsie when he allegedly punched and kicked a 27-year-old man in the head several times.
The 27-year-old man was taken to St George Hospital where he remains in a stable condition.
Hema then allegedly shoulder-charged a 46-year-old man after he was escorted from a bar in Belfield about 3.30pm.
Detectives began investigating the matter on Tuesday and arrested Hema at a house on Charlotte Street in Campsie.
He was formally refused bail and will remain in custody until his case returns to court next week.
Topics: crime, law-crime-and-justice, campsie-2194, nsw, australia, punchbowl-2196, bankstown-2200, burwood-2134
First posted
Interstate stakeholder group meets to discuss 'excessive' Northern Territory road building costs and share ideas
Posted
Road building costs in the Northern Territory remain around double what is paid in Western Australia and Queensland, stakeholders say.
And in a bid to reduce the price tag attached to sealing Australia's longest shortcut, the Outback Way that runs from Queensland through the Northern Territory and ends in Western Australia, stakeholders have held a closed meeting in Alice Springs.
Patrick Hill, chairman of the Outback Way lobby group and president of WA's Laverton Shire, 880km south-west of the Northern Territory border, said cross-border collaboration and scrutinising costs would help to seal the road sooner.
"Each party, the shires and the Territory Government are going to give a breakdown of [road building] costs so that we can identify where the expense is," he said.
"The other thing that we are looking at in Western Australia is crushing our own aggregate for the seal of the road from Laverton to the Northern Territory border."
Mr Hill said the Northern Territory Government had expressed interest in crushing its own gravel, and the group agreed that using competitive local contractors was of high importance.
In terms of the specifics around current costs, Mr Hill said shires in Queensland and Western Australian were paying a maximum of $280,000 per kilometre, compared with per kilometre costs of $500,000 and up to $1 million in the Northern Territory.
"Once we identify where the additional costs are in the Territory, we can work on reducing them," he said.
Reasons for excessive costs do not stack up
The reasons put forward in the meeting by the NT Department of Transport for the excessive roadwork costs included issues with access to gravel and having to start from scratch when building a road, subsequently using more material compared with Western Australia and Queensland, which the department said was starting from an existing formed base.
Mr Hill was not convinced by the explanations, and said in Western Australia roads had been built from clearing bush to the final seal for a total cost of about $280,000.
Cost saving ideas discussed at the meeting included possible improvements to the Northern Territory roadworks tender process, the length of road completed per NT project, and the standard of road being built in the Northern Territory compared with Western Australia and Queensland.
The tender process for Western Australian shires included calling for hourly rates for machines, Mr Hill said.
"Once the tender is awarded we call those machines in to do a particular job. It doesn't matter if it's on the Great Central Road or on another road," he said.
Mr Hill said from what he could gather, the Northern Territory went out to tender for entire projects.
This was discussed as an area where the Territory could potentially "drill down" on costs and get better value for money.
We don't a freeway in the outback. We want a good, raised up sealed road. Patrick Hill, Outback Way lobby group chairman
In terms of the length of road sealing projects, Mr Hill said that in Western Australia, road sections of about 50km per job would be built, compared with the Northern Territory's current project of 12km of the Plenty Highway from the Stuart Highway, just north of Alice Springs [a section of road that is already sealed to a lesser standard].
"Obviously mobilisation costs, machines getting to and from the site are in the cost of that project," Mr Hill said.
On the current work being done on the Plenty Highway, Mr Hill said the group had reported that the 12km was on track and would be completed within a couple of months.
He said the standard of road was higher than roads being built in other states.
"Queensland and Western Australian shires are building roads to standard that is acceptable to main roads and maybe we are putting too much emphasis on a particular section of the Outback Way road," he said.
"We don't a freeway in the outback. We want a good, raised up sealed road.
"The standard of road in each jurisdiction needs to be standardised so that we've all got a simple, sealed, eight metre road going across the country."
Topics: rural, livestock, agribusiness, alice-springs-0870
Matt Moylan named Penrith Panthers NRL captain
Posted
Penrith coach Anthony Griffin has made the first big call of his tenure by announcing Matt Moylan to replace Peter Wallace as captain for the upcoming NRL season.
Moylan's appointment on Wednesday comes as a shock given the experience of Wallace, Jamie Soward, Trent Merrin and Elijah Taylor on the roster.
At just 24 years of age, Moylan becomes the youngest captain in the NRL.
But it was his composure and presence on the training paddock that had left an instant impression on Griffin since taking over from Ivan Cleary late last year.
"I've been here now three months and made sure I've taken my time with this decision. He's a very composed young man," Griffin said.
"He's already achieved a hell of a lot in his short career, bearing in mind he still hasn't turned 25 yet."
The former Brisbane coach said he only began considering Moylan as a captaincy candidate after Christmas, but did not make his mind up until meeting with the City Origin representative last week.
"I had a chat to him and just wanted to make sure from his end that he was the right person," he said.
"The biggest thing was he said he wanted the job and he wanted the responsibility.
"It wasn't something that he questioned in himself or questioned my decision to ask him about it. That's what convinced me that it was the right time to go with him."
Moylan, who has long been compared to Broncos legend Darren Lockyer, said he was caught off guard by the decision, but was prepared to take on the role.
"Growing up, you want to play first grade and being from the local area, it's a massive achievement and I'm really honoured to be named captain for this year," he said.
"With the senior players we've got here and with Peter Wallace and Jamie Soward, guys that have done the job before, it was a bit of a surprise.
"But I'm ready for the challenge. It'll help me going forward as a footy player."
Griffin admitted Wallace, also a local product, would feel hard done by, but preferred the half-back focus on his return from twin knee reconstructions.
AAP
Topics: nrl, rugby-league, sport, penrith-2750, nsw, australia
Endangered Gilbert's potoroo added to threatened species action plan
Updated
One of the world's most endangered marsupials, the Gilbert's potoroo, has been added to a national threatened species trajectory list to boost its chances of survival.
Announced last year by Federal Environment Minister Greg Hunt, the Threatened Species Strategy Action Plan aims to protect 20 of the most at risk mammals in the country.
Twelve species were on the original list, with another eight, including the potoroo, added this month.
Only about 45 of the so-called rat kangaroos are left in the world, living in conservation areas in the Two People's Bay area near Albany.
Bushfires decimated the population stronghold at Two Peoples Bay in November last year.
Six potoroos that were living in a pest-free enclosure at Waychinicup National Park had also fallen prey to pythons native to the area.
Tony Friend from the Department of Parks and Wildlife has described the listing of the embattled marsupial as a "great relief".
"Now it's recognised nationwide as one of the mammals that need the most help, that means it will be given priority when there's funding rounds so that will help us when we apply for funds," he said.
Australia's threatened species commissioner, Gregory Andrews, said the marsupial's addition to the list would open up more opportunities to boost its population by 2020.
"Going forward, it means the Gilbert's potoroo is going to be more competitive for Green Army and National Landcare Program funding and activities," he said.
"There are also umbrella benefits, it will help other species such as the noisy scrub bird and western ground parrot which is in a serious condition at the moment."
Last year the Federal Government allocated $1.7 million to combat feral cats that have decimated native wildlife populations including the Gilbert's potoroo.
Topics: endangered-and-protected-species, albany-6330
First posted
Fuel given away for free by petrol station at Fyshwick in Canberra
Updated
Fuel was given away for free today at Fyshwick, causing a scramble among Canberra's cost-conscious motorists.
Between 12:00pm and 2:00pm, E10 unleaded petrol and diesel at Metro Petroleum on Barrier Street were listed at 0 cents per litre, with regular unleaded signposted at 2.7 cents.
The drastic price drop was not a glitch in the petrol station's electronic signage, but a promotional special to coincide with the launch of a new app.
Each motorist was restricted to a limit of 50 litres.
The petrol station said earlier this month it would be selling petrol at 9 cents per litre today, but dropped the cost to nil at the last moment.
The first arrival waited almost two hours to fill up his tank and he was not alone.
More than 100 motorists keen for a bargain in Canberra's expensive fuel market were quick to take up the offer, queuing all the way down Barrier Street despite heavy rain.
Traffic management was in place around Barrier Street but cars were able to pass through.
Canberra petrol prices remain 'unusually high'
Despite the drop at Fyshwick, prices remained high elsewhere in the territory.
Last week's unleaded average was 125.9 cents, despite the fact that elsewhere in Australia prices dropped below $1.
NRMA director Kate Lundy welcomed the special, and said it put a spotlight on the high cost of petrol in Canberra.
"Sure it's a stunt, but it's a stunt that's highlighting the fact that we're still paying too much for petrol," she said.
"ACT motorists are pretty fed up with unusually high petrol prices relative to other markets in the eastern states in Australia.
"We know that the ACT market is dominated by the big supermarkets, Coles and Woolies.
"That contributes to us paying a higher price than we ought to if you look at our pricing relative to places like Sydney."
Chief Minister Andrew Barr called on the competition watchdog to investigate.
"I have written to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) asking that one of their deep dives on competition in petrol retailing … that they look at Canberra," Mr Barr said.
"They haven't done that today, but I'm hopeful that they will as part of a future round of investigations."
Ms Lundy said while the ACCC had been keeping an eye on the Canberra market, continuing high prices showed more scrutiny was needed.
"The ACCC has a program of monitoring, clearly it's not strong enough," Ms Lundy said.
Topics: human-interest, oil-and-gas, fyshwick-2609, canberra-2600, act, australia
First posted
Tasmania bushfires: Emergency warning for Nelson Bay, Arthur River and Temma in state's north-west
Updated
Firefighters are among those who have been evacuated to a beach on Tasmania's west coast amid reports two homes have been destroyed by an out-of-control bushfire.
Key points: Out-of-control fire threatening communities in Tasmania's far north-west
Reports two properties destroyed
Authorities unable to assess damage yet
Residents and shack owners evacuated at Arthur River, Couta Rocks and Temma
About a dozen people are taking shelter on a beach at Sarah Anne Rocks, just south of Arthur River.
David Hardy, who owns a property in the area, said six firefighters were with him on the beach and at least two homes had been destroyed.
"They're saying conditions are just too extreme to attempt to even fight it," he said.
"They had to take refuge with us. Apart from being able to breathe, the visibility is just zero."
Shack owners in other areas tried to protect their properties from the blaze.
Crews said it was difficult to determine whether any homes or shacks had been lost in the fire.
The bushfire, which has been fanned by strong winds, prompted an emergency alert in Tasmania's far north-west, including Arthur River.
Some crews are having trouble reaching the fire ground because of damage to roads.
Fire authorities evacuated Arthur River as well as the small communities of Temma and Nelson Bay onto the beach.
Tasmanian Fire Service's Chief Fire Officer Gavin Freeman said properties were under threat at Nelson Bay and Temma, with crews literally "standing on back fences" trying to save them.
The fire is moving down the coast from north of Nelson Bay through Couta Rocks and towards Temma.
It's absolute hell, you can't see 10 feet, when you can it's just an eerie pool of evil looking smoke. David Hardy, shack owner
Part of the blaze is also closing in on Arthur River.
A watch and act alert was issued for communities south of Temma.
"It's absolute hell, you can't see 10 feet," Mr Hardy said.
"When you can it's just an eerie pool of evil-looking smoke ... the firefighters, there's six of them here because one of the bridges has burnt out and they can't get reinforcements in."
TFS is trying to bring in more tankers and three water bombers to boost crews on the ground.
Couta Rocks lobster fisher Graham Airey said he would use his boat to evacuate people from the area if needed.
"I've got a big fishing boat here and if it got to that stage I'd put everybody on the boat and head to sea," he said.
The fire began on Wuthering Heights Road, and has burnt through about 7,000 hectares, including Forestry Tasmania land.
Difficult to confirm property losses
The TFS said it would be hard to determine whether shacks had been lost because the fire is in hard-to-reach areas.
Circular Head Mayor Darryl Quilliam said there was a total of 150 residences in the three communities.
"These communities once upon a time were just little shack nodes but then people continued to build on," he said.
"The number one thing is to make sure that we don't lose people.
"Shacks and houses can be repaired and replaced but people can't."
Crews will have to contend with strong winds reaching 50 kilometres per hour for another 24 hours.
Melanie Webb from the Bureau of Meteorology said winds would not ease until late Thursday.
"It will probably still be reasonably windy tomorrow but there will still be a few more showers around so that might help a little bit," she said.
Police, who doorknocked residents, closed roads in the area surrounding the fire and advised motorists to check its website.
The TFS is calling in back-up crews from New Zealand to help fight an unprecedented number of fires in the state.
About 70 blazes are still burning out of control across the state, with an extra 30 tankers also set to arrive from interstate to help.
Topics: bushfire, arthur-river-7330
First posted
Perth Lord Mayor Lisa Scaffidi resists pressure to speak on CEO sacking
Updated
Lord Mayor Lisa Scaffidi has rejected bipartisan political pressure for the City of Perth to provide further explanation for last week's sacking of CEO Gary Stevenson.
Mr Stevenson's contract was terminated with more than 12 months remaining, with Ms Scaffidi saying at the time council felt a need to take the city in a new direction with a different management style.
Both Premier Colin Barnett and Opposition Leader Mark McGowan rejected that explanation as unsatisfactory and called on the council to provide more details.
But Ms Scaffidi insisted that was not needed.
"Absolutely not, the ratepayers elect the councillors to appropriately manage the City of Perth," Ms Scaffidi said.
"I have had conversations with [Local Government Minister Tony] Simpson and Colin Barnett and I don't believe there are any other concerns that I am aware of."
Mr Stevenson's sacking followed investigations into elected member travel, including an internal review of council travel last year, which he ordered.
It also followed a corruption watchdog probe into Ms Scaffidi's failure to properly declare gifts.
But Ms Scaffidi has consistently denied Mr Stevenson's sacking was related to that issue.
Former planning and development director Martin Mileham was appointed the city's acting chief executive after Mr Stevenson's sacking.
Topics: local-government, perth-6000
First posted
A look at how reports of match-fixing in tennis rapidly led to the implementation of an independent review into the sport's anti-corruption program.
Former NSW police officer found guilty of bat attack on opposing player during cricket match
Updated
A former New South Wales police officer has been found guilty over a cricket bat attack on an opponent in a low grade match in Newcastle in 2015.
Merewether batsman Michael James Varnum, 47, was today found guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and common assault.
Newcastle Local Court heard that after colliding with bowler Peter Lalor from the opposing Jewells Beavers side in February, Varnum whacked his opponent twice on the head with his bat.
Magistrate Robert Stone found the attack was not accidental, describing Varnum as "cocky" while he gave inconsistent evidence.
It was awful for my family and my kids. I'm still playing, the worst part is my son has stopped playing cricket, but he'll get back into it. Peter Lalor, cricket bat attack victim
"I'm glad we got justice, I'm glad to be free of it all," Mr Lalor said.
"I'm glad to be here, and glad to be on the end of a good decision by the judge and the courts.
"It was a very thorough decision, and it was all very well written out, and we're very happy with the decision."
Mr Lalor said Varnum's behaviour should not be part of sport.
"The Beavers cricket team is the best team in the world, and we just play to have fun," he said.
"Something like this is not associated with cricket, or sport at all."
The blows to the head resulted in Mr Lalor needing nine sutures, and he suffered from headaches, nausea and dizziness for several weeks afterwards.
He said his injuries had now healed.
"They lasted quite some time, but they're now pretty much non-existent," he said.
Son stops playing cricket after assault
An emotional Mr Lalor said the incident had impacted his family.
"I'm still playing. The worst part is my son has stopped playing cricket, but he'll get back into it," he said.
Now the court has handed down its decision, Mr Lalor said it was up to the Newcastle District Cricket Association to decide what action it needed to take.
"I don't think there would be many people who would want someone who does an act like that on the cricket field or any sporting field for that matter," he said.
"But that's up to them. To be honest, I've had enough now so I'm happy for them to deal with that."
Mr Lalor said he did not want anyone else to experience what he did.
"It was awful for my family and my kids," he said.
"So, I just don't want him to hurt someone else, and I want people to be able to play sport for fun."
Varnum will face a sentencing hearing in March, with his lawyer asking the magistrate for a non-custodial sentence.
Topics: assault, courts-and-trials, cricket, newcastle-2300, jewells-2280, merewether-2291
First posted
Eddie McGuire wants AFL preseason winner to be granted finals berth
Posted
Collingwood boss Eddie McGuire has called for the winner of the AFL's pre-season competition to be awarded a berth in the finals.
In a radical proposal, the Magpies supremo also wants the AFL to split clubs into a top 12 and bottom six after round 17.
The top 12 teams would play each other once over the remaining six rounds for finals positions while the bottom six will clash for another wildcard spot and the number one draft pick.
"What you end up getting is that every game will mean something," McGuire said on Triple M on Wednesday.
McGuire added nobody cared about the current preseason cup format, which were "glorified practice matches".
"The start of the season doesn't have much zing," McGuire said. "It is just hit and giggle. You just want to get through without injuries."
He added offering the top draft pick as an incentive to the bottom six sides would also prevent any threat of tanking in the final rounds.
"Good teams will still win the flag, more teams will make the finals," he said.
"By Round 12 the bottom five or six teams are usually cooked, anyway."
AAP
Topics: australian-football-league, sport, collingwood-3066, vic, australia
Australian Open: Milos Raonic to meet Andy Murray in semi-finals at Melbourne Park
Updated
Canadian Milos Raonic will meet world number two Andy Murray in the Australian Open semi-finals after needing four sets to defeat Gael Monfils on Rod Laver Arena.
Raonic, the tournament's 13th seed, got past the athletic Frenchman 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 in two hours and 17 minutes to book just his second semi-final appearance at a major.
It is also the deepest he has gone at the Australian Open and he will face off against Murray on Friday night.
Murray had earlier advanced to the last four via his tight 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 6-3 victory over David Ferrer.
Defending champion and world number one Novak Djokovic, and four-time winner Roger Federer will contest the first semi-final on Thursday night.
"It's a great challenge ahead of me, a challenge that I believe I have within myself to find the solution to," Raonic said of facing Murray.
"It's [going to be] a great fight that I'm going to put out there with all my heart, all my effort, and hopefully I can make the most of the opportunity."
Raonic has met Murray six times with their head-to-head battle all square at three wins apiece.
He knocked out 2014 Australian Open champion and number four seed Stan Wawrinka in the fourth round and that form was evident early in the quarter-final, while Monfils seemed out of sorts.
The 23rd-seeded Monfils refused to continue his opening service game until a replay screen in the stadium was switched off, then he lost his serve in the fourth game.
He also needed more tape applied to the right hand he injured in the full-stretch dive in the fourth round that went viral on social media.
But he saved two break points in the fifth game of the second set then seized the momentum with a decisive break of serve.
Raonic quickly counter-attacked, however, breaking Monfils' opening service game on his way to the third set.
He was at his big-serving best in the fourth and broke Monfils in the fifth game to advance.
Earlier, Murray was effective in the open air and devastating after the Rod Laver Arena roof was closed as he stormed into the semi-finals.
The pair split the opening two sets of their quarter-final and Murray had just broken for a 3-1 lead in the third when organisers delayed the match to shut the roof with a heavy storm approaching from the west.
Ferrer was visibly upset with the decision, which played into Murray's hands.
He broke the Spaniard again to claim the third set and wrapped up the victory in the fourth in three hours and 20 minutes.
ABC/AAP
Topics: australian-open, tennis, sport, melbourne-3000
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Leon Bignell, SA Tourism Minister, to pay Adelaide hotel stay after Opposition's attack
Posted
South Australia's Tourism Minister Leon Bignell will repay money he claimed for a five-star hotel stay in Adelaide after the Opposition described the spending as inappropriate.
Key points: Mr Bignell claimed $185 for a hotel stay in Adelaide
Previously defended a $180,000 travel bill before a hearing
Opposition says Mr Bignell has shown a bad pattern of behaviour
Mr Bignell, who lives in McLaren Vale, billed taxpayers $185 for an overnight stay at the Intercontinental Hotel room ahead of the city's Christmas Pageant last year.
The Minister spoke at the South Australian Tourism Awards in the CBD on the Friday night before attending the pageant the next day.
Shadow Treasurer Rob Lucas told 891 ABC Adelaide the Opposition had uncovered the claim which he described as showing a bad pattern of behaviour.
Mr Lucas said there were "a number of examples" of questionable claims, including "dining out with his staff whilst overseas and buying bottles of Argentinian wine for more than $100, [and] hiring limousines to travel a kilometre to the MCG for a footy game when everyone else was walking."
In a statement, Mr Bignell said he would repay the money.
"Rather than have a story that detracts from the good work we are doing in my portfolio areas, I'll pay the money back," he said.
Last year Mr Bignell appeared before a budgets estimates hearing to defend his $180,000 travel bill for the previous financial year.
The expenses included a $248 meal during his trip to the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. The bill also included the $100 bottle of Argentine wine.
At the time Mr Bignell defended buying the wine, saying it was in competition with Australian wine overseas and he wanted to know about the product.
"What I know is that if you're in business, or you're in politics or you're in sport, you always want to know the measure of your opponent," he said in July.
"If our opponent's Argentina, I want to try what their wine's like."
Topics: states-and-territories, state-parliament, government-and-politics, adelaide-5000, sa
Hound cross Bailey has been waiting to find a new home for more than 200 days. (27 January 2016)
Posted
Hound cross Bailey has been waiting to find a new home for more than 200 days. (27 January 2016)
Topics: human-interest, animals, canberra-2600, act
A new beginning for the Plenty Highway just north of Alice Springs
Posted
A new beginning for the Plenty Highway just north of Alice Springs
Topics: rural, road-transport, livestock, agribusiness, alice-springs-0870
Drug support worker jailed for offering to supply heroin to addicts
Updated
A woman who supplied heroin to people while working for an organisation that helps drug users has been jailed for more than two years.
Rosemary Rebecca Kaniski, 68, pleaded guilty last year to 26 counts of offering to sell or supply a drug to another.
The Perth District Court was told the charges related to very small quantities of heroin.
Kaniski was employed by the West Australian Substance Users Association (WASUA), which aims to help people with drug problems by encouraging safe use of substances.
She had been employed by the organisation since 2007 and had been a volunteer before then.
Three other former employees are also facing charges after an investigation by WA Police that involved the interception of mobile phone calls over a three-week period.
Ms Kaniski had used a mobile phone supplied by WASUA to facilitate the drug deals.
Defence lawyer Justine Fisher told the court the people who purchased the heroin from Ms Kaniski were not clients of the association.
Ms Fisher said Kaniski was a dealer and user who had been struggling with substance abuse since the age of 17.
She said her client benefited from the transactions by being supplied with small amounts of heroin for her own use, but did not make a financial profit.
Judge John Staude said Kaniski had previous drug convictions including a four-year jail sentence, suggesting she understood the consequences of her offending.
"Ms Kaniski, sadly, has a 50-year heroin addiction," he said.
"It's a very sad story.
"But clearly you are not a first offender and cannot claim leniency on that basis."
Judge Staude also made observations about the way the Government funded WASUA operated, saying drug users supplying other drug users with syringes under the guise of being non-judgemental undermined the prohibition of illegal substances.
Kaniski will have to serve 13-and-a-half months before she is eligible for parole.
Topics: courts-and-trials, drug-offences, perth-6000
First posted
Inkling: Australia's first national kids newspaper without 'the gore' brainchild of journalist Saffron Howden
Updated
How do you talk to your kids about the war in Syria? A new national newspaper for young Australians intends to help parents and teachers do that but without the "gory details".
Inkling, a weekly newspaper and website has launched ahead of the school year and will feature national and international news, reviews and cartoons targeting students aged seven to 14.
"We want to create an Australia-wide community of kids who are involved in the news," Saffron Howden, editor and founder of Inkling, said.
"The idea is that we tell all the news that adults consume but we tell it in a child-friendly way."
In the first display edition of the paper, articles range from a book review of Matilda and a story about the experience of Syrian refugee children who are unable to go to school, to an opinion article about gender stereotypes written by a 14-year-old Sydney student.
There are also cartoons, graphics and photos that have "wide appeal" across the targeted age group.
Howden, a former Sydney Morning Herald journalist, told 702 ABC Sydney's Wendy Harmer that while adult newspapers are declining in circulation around the world, newspapers for children "are thriving".
UK newspaper First News, on which Inkling is modelled, has more than two million readers a week, according to its website.
"Kids are really interested in what's going on in the world, but a lot of parents or teachers don't want to expose their kids to the television news or the news in newspapers because a lot of it can be disturbing and gory and we make it not so," Howden said.
"We encourage kids' involvement so we're always going to have book reviews, movie reviews, game reviews written by kids and our opinion page will always be written by kids ... so they can be passionate about things and start a conversation about what's important to them."
While Inkling is currently being funded by Howden, who works from her house in the Blue Mountains, the newspaper will be subscriber- and sponsorship-based.
The newspaper will launch its first formal edition in April.
Topics: journalism, media, children, sydney-2000
First posted
Man stabbed to death during Perth bus port brawl
Updated
A man stabbed during a mass brawl at Perth's Esplanade bus port has died in hospital.
The incident, believed to have involved up to 20 people, caused traffic chaos in the city's central business district.
The 26-year-old man was taken to Royal Perth Hospital but later died.
Detectives are treating it as a suspected homicide.
Keith Champion was at the Esplanade bus port after spending the night on the Perth foreshore following the Australia Day Skyworks.
He said there were at least two groups of people fighting at the bus port, with people throwing bricks and other projectiles.
"This whole place was just filled with people just fighting, yelling, and swearing and everything," he said.
The bus port remains open but trains are not stopping at the Perth Esplanade train station.
Mounts Bay Road has been closed around the bus station, while The Esplanade has also been closed from Barrack Street to William Street.
Police said the Esplanade Train Station was open via the entrance on the corner of Mounts Bay Road and William Street.
There is no access via the upper concourse, including walkways between the Ernst Young Building and other adjoining walkways.
An earlier road closure on William Street has been lifted.
A large number of people are believed to have been involved in the brawl at the bus port about 3:30am.
Major Crime detectives are investigating.
Topics: crime, perth-6000
First posted
DeLorean drivers dismiss rumours of secret Blue World Order filming
Posted
Enthusiasts of the DeLorean, the car made famous by the Back To The Future trilogy, gathered en masse at Watson shops in Canberra's north at the weekend.
You always have people saying, 'why weren't you here 20 minutes ago, or yesterday, or tomorrow'. Callum Bowen, DeLorean driver
As many as seven of the rare cars were spotted flanked with cameras amid speculation they were in Canberra to film pick-ups for science-fiction movie Blue World Order.
Canberra DeLorean owner Callum Bowen was there with his treasured sports car but said the meeting was just an opportunity to catch up with fellow enthusiasts.
"It was just a complete coincidence," he told 666 ABC Canberra.
"Matthew Reilly, the author of Blue World Order, also owns a DeLorean, but we do cruises with groups of owners from Sydney and Melbourne."
Much of the filming for Blue World Order was completed in Canberra last year.

The much-anticipated thriller follows the struggle of one man trying to save his daughter, the only surviving child on the planet after a fatal virus takes over.
The film will feature Australian actor Jack Thompson and New Zealand actor Bruce Spence.
A spectacle of the past and the future
Mr Bowen said his car consistently attracted attention.
"Back To The Future cemented the DeLorean as an icon of the 1980s," he said.
"It was a seminal '80s movie and a seminal '80s car. The car really screams '80s even if you don't have all the Back To The Future bits and pieces on it."
Only 9,000 of the sports cars were built.
Although his DeLorean is not a time machine, Mr Bowen said he was always careful not to arrive late to anything.
"You always have people saying, 'why weren't you here 20 minutes ago, or yesterday, or tomorrow'," he said.
"You get great reactions — there's a certain element of being too good for your own shoes when you drive a luxury sports car. You really don't get that when you drive a DeLorean.
"Either people have no idea what it is or you get thumbs up or you have people yelling 'flux capacitor' at you as you drive past."
Topics: science-fiction-films, human-interest, popular-culture, canberra-2600
Next generation of outstanding central Queenslanders share dreams for future
Posted
Access to health services, taking care of family and encouraging more girls to study science and engineering are just a few of the issues on the minds of central Queensland's outstanding young achievers.
For Gladstone's new Young Citizen of the Year, Varsicka Kularadhan, access to health services in regional areas is one of her most pressing concerns.
Ms Kularadhan, who finished at Gladstone State High School in 2015, will begin her studies in medicine at Monash University this year.
It's great to see how much the community has openly accepted me. And I've been able to help my community as much as they've helped me growing up. Varsicka Kularadhan, Gladstone's Young Citizen of the Year
She said witnessing a lack of services outside metropolitan areas had been a catalyst for her pursuing this career path.
"I've really noticed the gap in healthcare, in not just Gladstone but in rural and regional areas," she said.
"I think that's always motivated me."
Ms Kularadhan said she had seen the positive impact Gladstone's GP super clinic had had on her area, and hoped to return to the region to work when she finished her degree.
"It's definitely something I'm hoping to do," she said.
"I've lived in Gladstone since I was eight, it's home to me, it's what I've always known."
Ms Kularadhan and her family immigrated to Australia from Sri Lanka when she was three years old.
She said being named Young Australian of the Year in her local area was proof of the positive impact immigrants could have in a community.
"It's great to see how much the community has openly accepted me," she said.
"And I've been able to help my community as much as they've helped me growing up."
Young carer pushes for more mental health awareness
Rockhampton's Young Citizen of the Year, Madison Dyer, will spend 2016 completing Year 12 while also caring for her father who has a mental illness.
She said she planned to use her new role to promote awareness about mental health issues.
"It's extremely important; everyone has a unique story whether that's people with a mental illness or young carers," Ms Dyer said.
"It really needs to be shown in the community that there's help out there and that they can access wonderful services in the area."
Ms Dyer commended the work of Headspace in Rockhampton but said she hoped more funding for mental illness services would be made available in the future.
Science not just for boys
Sarah Callinan has clocked up many impressive achievements in the last year, such as being chosen to represent Australia at the International Space Camp at the US Space and Rocket Centre.
She was also recently named Dux of St Ursula's College and was one of just a handful of students to win a Tuckwell Scholarship to help fund her university studies.
As Livingstone Shire Council's new Young Citizen of the Year, Ms Callinan said she wanted to encourage other girls and young women to study STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) subjects.
"Most girls feel like they'll be excluded from [those subjects] because there's so many boys and not so many girls," she said.
"They think it's not a girl's profession but it is; it's for everyone."
Ms Callinan will practice what she preaches this year and will soon begin a degree in engineering and business administration at Australian National University.
She said other young women might consider following in her footsteps if they were given the opportunity to hear from women studying STEM subjects or working in the field.
"To put a face to the profession so they can learn about what it actually is, not just misconceptions they have from the media and things like that," she said.
Topics: australia-day, awards-and-prizes, multiculturalism, mental-health, regional, local-government, youth, education, rockhampton-4700, yeppoon-4703, gladstone-4680
A Country Practice, Prisoner soap star Lois Ramsey dies, aged 93
Updated
Australian actress Lois Ramsey has died at the age of 93 after decades of on-screen appearances in shows such as Prisoner and The Box.
Ramsey was also known for roles on Home and Away, A Country Practice, Blue Heelers and All Saints.
She earned an AFI Award for best performance by an actress in a guest role in a television series for her portrayal of Mrs Robbins on the ABC series Grass Roots.
In the Australian film Crackerjack, Ramsey played the custodian of the bowling club's swear jar, Gwen — alongside Mick Malloy, Bill Hunter and Judith Lucy.
Born in Adelaide in 1922 to Bill and Maud Dickson, she did not start acting until later in life.
She married Cuth Ramsey and had two children while performing Adelaide amateur theatre until her late 30s.
Ramsey, along with other creatives, set up the Flinders Street Revue Company in 1961 to present satirical revues, which became a fixture at the Adelaide Fringe Festival.
In 1962 Ramsey adapted the novel The Cousin From Fiji by Norman Lindsay into a musical that played at Adelaide's Union Theatre to sold-out crowds.
Later in life, Ramsey starred in numerous productions by the Sydney Theatre Company and Melbourne Theatre Company.
Topics: death, community-and-society, actor, film-movies, arts-and-entertainment, adelaide-5000, sa, australia
First posted
Shots fired during prisoner brawl at Goulburn prison, Corrective Services NSW confirms
Updated
A brawl at Goulburn maximum security jail had to be broken up by gunfire and tear gas, Corrective Services NSW has said.
The fight, which happened at 11:45am on Tuesday, was said to have lasted a couple of minutes and no weapons were involved, according to the department.
It said staff followed normal procedure when the inmates refused to stop, firing two warning shots from a tower before using tear gas.
Two inmates were taken to hospital for medical assessment, although the department did not reveal the nature of their injuries.
Corrective Services Minister David Elliot declined to comment, but the Public Services Union blamed the violence on overcrowding.
No staff members were injured.
Topics: prisons-and-punishment, goulburn-2580
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Saffron Howden editor of Inkling, Australia's first national kids newspaper at her home in the Blue Mountains, January 24 2016
Posted
Saffron Howden said the idea of Australia's first kids newspaper has been "bubbling in her mind" for a while.
Topics: journalism, kids-games-and-links, primary-schools, secondary-schools, sydney-2000
Qurindi TAFE to be replaced with CBD shop front
Posted
Questions have been raised about the New South Wales Government's commitment to tertiary education in the Upper Hunter and New England regions.
Plans to close the Quirindi TAFE campus and replace it with a shop front have come to light.
It comes as the Baird Government pushes ahead with its Smart and Skilled reforms.
The Henry Street campus currently offers courses in business, digital media and IT, as well as online study options.
Ultimately, the aim here is to reduce the number of TAFE campuses in our region. Governments should be the custodians of TAFE, they shouldn't be smashing it to pieces. Kathy Nicholson, NSW Teacher's Federation organiser
TAFE Organiser for the NSW Teacher's Federation Kathy Nicholson said it was a disgrace.
"It's part of the incredibly shabby treatment of the Baird Government of TAFE," she said.
"It's being closed and replaced by a shonky, shifty online shop front.
"Questions need to be asked — what's happening to the TAFE? Is it going to be sold off? What are the Nationals doing to stop rural decline and to stand up for education in our region?"
Ms Nicholson said she believed some number shifting has been involved.
"They've engineered it to appear as though there's no action at Quirindi by insisting that student enrolments go through Tamworth," she said.
"Ultimately, the aim here is to reduce the number of TAFE campuses in our region.
"Governments should be the custodians of TAFE, they shouldn't be smashing it to pieces."
Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen has confirmed the relocation, but said students would be better off.
"It's going to be changed from where it is now to a more modern, flexible facility," he said.
"The services provided by TAFE will continue as they are.
"While ever there's demand, TAFE will be there.
"TAFE will remain with a presence, in fact in a more convenient location, in town, in Quirindi."
Mr Johnsen said the government was committed to providing tertiary study options in regional areas.
"There'll be plenty of space for people to be able to do all the face-to-face, one-on-one learning that is required," he said.
"You can read a book anywhere, in any form of room, so quite frankly, that is just a bit of scare mongering.
"The Nationals are actually very focused on making sure that TAFE facilities and TAFE courses are being delivered as best, to more people, as they possibly can."
A spokesman for TAFE New England said the 'Connected Learning Centre' would improve accessibility to new learning technologies.
"TAFE New England has not yet finalised the date for this move and will continue to keep the community informed," he said.
"TAFE New England will ensure that no Quirindi-based student was disadvantaged during the relocation process.
"In the meantime, it is business as usual and our Quirindi campus is open for 2016 enrolments."
Topics: education-industry, access-to-education, adult-education, quirindi-2343, muswellbrook-2333
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Robo-float fleet to 'revolutionise climate shift detection'
Posted
A plan to develop a global fleet of robotic floats will revolutionise our ability to detect shifts in the ocean from climate change, a CSIRO scientist says.
About 40 scientists from around the globe including Japan, the United States and Australia, gathered in France this month and formed a plan for the number of 'bio-Argo' floats in the ocean to swell from a couple of hundred to 1,000.
The free-floating sensors have only been used relatively experimentally and the plan would see the creation of global observation network.
Dr Nick Hardman-Mountford from the CSIRO, who represented Australia during the meeting, said funding had not yet been secured but the project would be a significant step forward for marine observation.
"It's going to completely revolutionise the way we see the life support systems in the ocean, in terms of the nutrients to support life - where the carbon goes, what's happening with the algae in response to climate change and the knock-on effects for marine food webs, for fisheries and ecosystems," he said.
"So this is a view we just don't have, it's going to completely change the way we see the oceans."
The specialised bio-Argo floats dive thousands of metres below the ocean surface before rising and transmitting real-time climate research data to scientists.
Oceans have already started to become affected by climate change, triggering concerns about widespread challenges to ecosystems.
Float plan to be presented to world leaders
Dr Hardman-Mountford, the team leader for Marine Biophysics at the CSIRO, said he anticipates that as seas continue to warm the upper layer of the ocean will become more stable.
"That means it's harder for algae to grow there so there's going to be less production and so that means less feed for the ecosystems," he said.
"So that's quite a severe effect but to be able to actually say that's happening is going to take a lot of measurements over quite a long period of time and until we get started we won't be able to track what's really happening to marine ecosystems properly."
A number of the floats already deployed in the Indian Ocean are sending streams of data to scientists about things like dissolved oxygen, nitrate and chlorophyll levels.
The information is used to better understand life in the ocean starting at the base level with algae and phytoplankton.
Dr Hardman-Mountford said phytoplankton and algal cells take up carbon dioxide in the water and use sunlight to fix that into organic chemicals that form the feed for all other life in the ocean.
As well as better understanding how phytoplankton and algae were being affected by climate change Dr Hardman-Mountford said the floats could be used to measure the success of emission reduction targets, since the ocean absorbed a significant amount of carbon from the atmosphere.
Scientists involved in the plan would now take it to their respective governments to push for it to put on the agenda.
Despite the hurdles ahead, Dr Hardman-Mountford said he felt positive about the plan's future.
"I feel we're at the beginning of something new that's going to really provide the data we need so we can understand what's happening to marine ecosystems as they change," he said.
Topics: climate-change, oceans-and-reefs, environment, perth-6000
Controversial Castlemaine Australia Day event takes the form of art installation
Updated
Following death threats, Castlemaine's Jim Coad cancelled his Chuck Another Flag on the Barbie? event and created an art installation using barbeques and Barbie dolls.
After much concern on social media, the planned 6pm Australia Day event was cancelled with Coad citing safety concerns.
"Due to public safety concerns, I have decided to cancel tonight's event," read his Facebook post.
"The intrusion of the extremist sector (largely from out-of-town) has concerned me and I want to keep you all safe."
If an object like the flag has become so sacred that we can't question it, and it's more important than a life — we are in trouble. Jim Coad, Castlemaine artist
Despite some comments on Facebook claiming victory over the cancellation of the event, Coad insists the event did still take place, albeit at another time.
"I wanted to proceed with the event and that was our opportunity to do so — to chuck another flag on the barbie," he said.
The art installation was set up from 8am to 4pm in Victory Park in Castlemaine, the site of the original planned event.
However, Coad said he made the decision to leave his event after feeling threatened as a planned council Australia Day function was ending.
"At some point it became very evident that I was being 'checked out'," Coad said.
"Some rough looking characters started taking an interest in me."
Barbecues and Barbie dolls
Australian Values and The Heroines of Australian Values jointly formed Coad's art installation with pieces available for purchase.
The Australian Values involved 12 flags placed upon 12 brightly coloured portable barbeques.
The "flags" were pieces of calico with the words of Australian values, as defined by Coad, written on them.
Coad said although they were not the Australian flags people might imagine, in his mind they were.
[Coad] was distracting from what was really going on with the community and I don't think it was the time and place for it. Joyce, ABC Central Victoria listener
"They do represent, in my mind, through words, what it means to be Australian or what I think it means to be Australian — so yes, they are Australian flags," he said.
The other installation involved Barbie dolls.
"We chucked a dozen flags on a dozen Barbie dolls," Coad said.
The "flags" contained various phrases that Coad had obtained from different government and statutory websites.
"[They were] about what people broadly consider to be Australia values," he said.
"In my opinion, they were fairly incontestable things like freedom of speech and freedom of association and fair play."
'Driven a wedge through community'
The event continues to receive comments on social media with both support for and condemnation of Coad.
"I think I have driven a pretty big wedge through the community on a number of axes over this, and that does make me a little bit sad to be honest," Coad said.
"But I find the Australian flag offensive and I find all this flag-waving offensive.
"Australians never used to be like that; it's something that's grown over the last twenty years, and I think its ugly."
If you are going to raise an issue about nationalism then there is only one day to do it, and that is the most inappropriate day to celebrate our nation that we can find. Jim Coad, Castlemaine artist
Although he said many people were in support of the event, Coad drew attention to one post which he said highlighted the very point he was trying to make.
"You don't burn our flag or even suggest you're going to burn it," one Facebook comment said.
"We don't dwell on what our forefathers did — we are Australian and proud of it."
Coad said many people did not want to think about what it meant to be Australian.
"We just want to be proud," he said.
One listener named Joyce disagreed with Coad and said Australian values were supported and honoured by many people at the council-organised Australia Day event in Castlemaine.
She said the day included an Aboriginal welcome with elder Ricky Nelson addressing the crowd alongside a citizen ceremony for immigrants that included an Aboriginal marking ceremony.
"[Coad] was distracting from what was really going on with the community and I don't think it was the time and place for it," she said.
Coad insists it was the most appropriate day to raise awareness.
"If you are going to raise an issue about nationalism then there is only one day to do it, and that is the most inappropriate day to celebrate our nation that we can find," he said.
"If an object like the flag has become so sacred that we can't question it, and it's more important than a life — we are in trouble."
Topics: australia-day, community-and-society, indigenous-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander, indigenous-culture, local-government, visual-art, castlemaine-3450
First posted
India car crash: Seventh member of Datta family dies more than two weeks after tragic accident
Updated
The seventh and last member of a South Australian family involved in a car accident in India has died.
Rupen Datta, 48, died in an Indian hospital more than two weeks after his wife, Animaka, 45, daughters Nikita and Pipasa, aged 8 and 12, and sister-in-law Sonali, were killed while driving from Delhi to the Taj Mahal.
The Dattas' 17-year-old son, Digvijoy, died in hospital a short time after the accident.
It is believed a burst tyre caused the car they were travelling in to smash through a road barrier and flip onto its roof.
His father-in-law — who initially survived the crash — later suffered a fatal heart attack in hospital upon the news of his family members' deaths.
Family friend Raja Chaudhuri said Rupen never came out of a coma.
"He will be remembered as the finest ever gentleman," he said.
"He was such a family person and had such a magnificent life, so kind.
"All of the adjectives in the English dictionary would not be good enough to describe him."
Days after news of the tragedy emerged, about 200 people gathered to pay their respects to the family at the restaurant they ran, Urban India, on Henley Beach Road at Mile End in Adelaide's western suburbs.
Dozens more spilled out onto the street to take part in the traditional Hindu service.
Topics: community-and-society, road, adelaide-5000, mile-end-5031, sa, india
First posted
David Warner wins Allan Border Medal and Test player of the year award
Updated
David Warner's transformation from problem child to consistent performer has been recognised, with the Australia vice-captain winning his first Allan Border Medal.
Warner topped the polls at Cricket Australia's awards night in Melbourne on Wednesday, tallying 240 votes to win the most-coveted prize ahead of captain Steve Smith (219) and Mitchell Starc (183).
Allan Border Medal: The Winners Allan Border Medal: David Warner Test Player of the Year: David Warner ODI Player of the Year: Glenn Maxwell Belinda Clark Award: Ellyse Perry Domestic Player of the Year: Adam Voges Bradman Young Cricketer of the Year: Alex Ross
The 29-year-old was also named Test player of the year, while Glenn Maxwell was crowned one-day international player of the year.
Ellyse Perry won her first Belinda Clark Award, claiming the highest individual Australian women's cricket honour ahead of Southern Stars captain Meg Lanning.
Smith scored more runs than Warner over the voting period, a total of 2181 in all formats.
But there were fewer troughs in Warner's year. For instance, he top-scored in Australia's woeful Ashes Test losses at Edgbaston and Trent Bridge.
The silverware is the latest reminder of how far Warner has come since his career had been at the crossroads in 2013 when he was involved in a physical altercation with England batsman Joe Root at a bar in Birmingham during the Ashes tour.
It is the first time Warner has been honoured at the function, save for when he was named Bradman Young Cricketer of the Year in 2012.
Warner polled a maximum six votes in the third Ashes Test, two Tests against New Zealand, the recent SCG Test against West Indies plus two one-day internationals in the past year.
I honestly thought Smithy had a terrific year and I thought he would have taken this out. David Warner
He thanked his wife Candice Falzon in his acceptance speech, while admitting he thought Smith would win the Allan Border Medal.
"Candice you're my rock. I love you to death and I probably wouldn't be playing cricket today without you," Warner said.
"I honestly thought Smithy had a terrific year and I thought he would have taken this out."
Warner finished fifth in voting for the one-day international award, which Maxwell won with 28 votes.
Starc tallied only 25 one-day international votes despite being named player of the tournament in Australia's successful 2015 World Cup campaign.
Perry caps off remarkable 2015 campaign
Perry polled 33 votes to claim the Belinda Clark Award ahead of two-time winner Lanning (20).
The all-rounder led the Southern Stars for runs and wickets in the 10-match voting period.
The 25-year-old scored 375 runs and snared 17 wickets for Australia in 2015, while she captained the Sydney Sixers in the inaugural Women's Big Bash League (WBBL) season.
"I'm living a dream job, which is wonderful," Perry said in her acceptance speech.
Women's cricket has definitely taken a huge number of steps forward. Ellyse Perry
"The last 12 months has been a huge highlight for myself and the team.
"Women's cricket has definitely taken a huge number of steps forward ... the WBBL recently being a watershed moment.
"More and more young girls want to play the sport. Hopefully, the more we play, the more young girls want to play."
Meanwhile, Adam Voges finished fourth in voting for the Test player of the year but collected the domestic player of the year gong.
Voges scored a record-breaking 1,358 runs for Western Australia in the 2014/15 Sheffield Shield season, culminating with a ton in the final that sealed his Test call-up at age 35.
"It's been an incredible 12 months," Voges said.
Alex Ross was named Bradman Young Cricketer of the Year after impressing at Adelaide Strikers and scoring five centuries for South Australia in the voting period.
There was no Twenty20 prize awarded, as Australia only played one match in 2015.
Wally Grout and Jeff Thomson were added to Cricket Australia's Hall of Fame.
ABC/AAP
Topics: cricket, sport, melbourne-3000
First posted
Tennis match fixing scandal: authorities announce probe into anti-corruption unit after BBC, Buzzfeed allegations
Updated
Tennis's governing bodies have announced an independent review into their anti-corruption unit following recent allegations of failing to pursue evidence of alleged match-fixing.
The announcement comes in response to a BBC-Buzzfeed report released just before the Australian Open that claimed authorities failed to thoroughly pursue evidence of alleged corruption in the sport and irregular betting patterns.
The review will:
Review and report on the appropriateness and effectiveness of the Tennis Anti-Corruption Program
Take into account public commentary regarding the processes, procedures and resources
Make recommendations for change
"The Independent Review Panel will review and report on the appropriateness and effectiveness of the Tennis Anti-Corruption Program and make recommendations for change," a statement from the governing bodies read.
"In conducting the review, the IRP will take into account public commentary regarding the processes, procedures and resources of the Tennis Integrity Unit (TIU)."
The governing bodies said they expected the independent review to address how the TIU could be more transparent, additional resourcing of the unit, and governance changes that enhance the unit's independence.
The governing bodies have committed to fund and implement the review's recommendations and make those recommendations public.
Adam Lewis QC will head the independent review.
"Let me just say that it is unprecedented that the seven stakeholders of tennis have come together so quickly with one purpose, and that is with the sole aim to restore public confidence in our sport," ATP president Chris Kermode told a news gathering.
"All of us, all seven bodies in our sport, believe that with everything in the news and the serious allegations that have been thrown at our sport, that the last thing anyone wants is another sports body investigating itself, which is why we have taken this very bold step to commission a completely independent review.
"This will be an open review, nothing is off the table. Adam Lewis QC and the review panel can look at anything, they can talk to anyone, investigate anything, and the four important points are there is no deadline to this review, it will take as long as is needed. It will cost what it costs.
"There have been record crowds here at the Australian Open, and at all the grand slams, all the ATP events, all the WTO events around the world, we have the best generation of players that I've ever seen and tennis is one of and, if not the best sports entertainment products in the world, leaders in integrity and we aim to keep it that way."
Kermode denies tennis has lagged behind betting landscape
Kermode denied tennis authorities were lagging behind the changing landscape of sport and betting, saying the time was right to investigate any claims of fixing.
... the review panel can look at anything, they can talk to anyone, investigate anything, and the four important points are there is no deadline to this review, it will take as long as is needed. It will cost what it costs. ATP president Chris Kermode
"I don't think it automatically means we are behind the curve, but I think it has provided an opportunity to take a good look," he said.
"The landscape has changed, we are in a different world and this is clearly the time to have a look."
Kermode said articles naming players linked to the scandal was "irresponsible", saying only irregular betting patterns had been identified, not evidence of actual fixing.
"I have seen more lists in the last week of various names and matches. It's important to point out that having lists which are mainly compiled by suspicious betting patterns ... do not mean corruption," he said.
"They are a red flag and they are investigated.
"Personally, I think it's irresponsible for anyone to publish names, verging on libel and we believe any player, until they are proven guilty, should be allowed to play and shouldn't have their reputation damaged at all.
"So as I said, the lists purely come from irregular betting patterns and that is not evident."
Meanwhile, one of the players embroiled in a suspected match-fixing controversy at the Australian Open, David Marrero, has appeared on a secret blacklist of professional tennis players who have played in matches bookmakers deemed to be suspicious.
The blacklist, seen by the ABC's Four Corners as part of a wider investigation into match-fixing in the sport, is maintained by one of Europe's biggest bookmakers. The program handed the list to tennis authorities on Monday.
On the weekend, bookmaker Pinnacle Sports suspended betting markets on an Australian Open mixed doubles match pitting Marrero and his Spanish compatriot Lara Arruabarrena against Polish player Lukasz Kubot and Czech Andrea Hlavackova.
At least 19 other bookmakers including Ladbrokes also cancelled their betting markets on the match, according to historical betting data available online.
BBC-Buzzfeed report nothing new but 'changed environment'
In the immediate aftermath of the BBC-Buzzfeed release, the Tennis Integrity Unit (TIU) rejected claims it had suppressed evidence of match-fixing.
A notorious 2007 match between Martin Vassallo Arguello and former world number three Nikolay Davydenko was of particular interest in the report, a match that attracted millions of dollars' worth of highly suspicious bets from Russian-based accounts.
Former player Daniel Koellerer - currently serving a life ban for alleged fixing - also came forward, saying he was offered tens of thousands of dollars to throw matches, but denies he ever took up the offers.
World number one and Australian Open favourite Novak Djokovic revealed he "felt terrible" about being approached to fix a tennis match when he was a teenager in 2006, but stressed he had never spoken to the fixer.
Several high profile players have demanded proof of the BBC and Buzzfeed's allegations, including 17-time major winner Roger Federer, while recently-retired Australian star Lleyton Hewitt slammed a blog post that linked him with the fixing scandal.
"I don't believe [the BBC-Buzzfeed report] did reveal anything new, but I think the program was aired, it was widely written about and it has changed the environment," Tennis Integrity Board chairman Philip Brook said.
"We are very determined to make sure that we demonstrate to all of you today and to everybody around the world that we take this matter very seriously, and that the integrity of our sport is paramount."
Topics: tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Communication key to helping children with transition to high school, expert says
Posted
Starting high school can be scary for some children, but one expert says just talking to your child can go a long way towards easing their anxiety about the transition.
Dr Charlotte Keating is a Melbourne-based provisional psychologist and neuroscientist who works with children and adolescents.
She told 774 ABC Melbourne's Clare Bowditch the shift from primary school to high school was "pretty confronting" for many young people.
"In some ways it's one of the biggest transitions they'll probably ever face in life," Dr Keating said.
She said the change came at a time when they were also experiencing physical and emotional changes due to adolescence.
"Having an open line of communication, so that you can talk about those things, is pretty important for them," she said.
Old friendships important as new ones form
Dr Keating said talking to your child about what to expect at high school was vital.
"Taking the mystery out of it as much as you possibly can is probably the best strategy," she said.
"Probably the biggest shift is the change from having one teacher and one classroom to multiple teachers and multiple subjects."
As well as that structural change, she said, there were new students the child would not have met before and a new school environment they were not yet comfortable with.
She said high school students had more responsibilities, including "getting to classes on time, remembering all of their sports uniforms and books and equipment".
Helping your child start high school Talk to your child about what to expect
Respond to your child's concerns
Get to know your child's teachers
Help your child maintain old friendships
Establish a routine around eating, sleeping and exercise
Try not to worry unduly Dr Charlotte Keating, provisional psychologist and neuroscientist Dr Charlotte Keating, provisional psychologist and neuroscientist
As well as maintaining communication with their child, Dr Keating said parents should form a good relationship with their child's teachers.
"Teachers are fairly well versed and resourced in how to best meet the needs of a variety of children," she said.
"It's useful for parents to establish a good rapport with the teachers who are teaching their children."
Dr Keating said it was also important to establish routines around eating, sleeping and exercise and to encourage children to stick to them.
She said weekend play dates with old friends could give children something to look forward to at the end of the school week.
"One of the things I always tell parents and young people is to stay in contact with their old friends," she said.
While parents tend to anticipate problems and worry about them, according Dr Keating, it is important they instead listen to their children's concerns and respond calmly and rationally.
She said some children were very anxious about starting high school while others had no concerns at all and were "ready to go".
"Respond to that level of concern, as you see it presented," she said.
Topics: secondary, children, adolescent-health, parenting, human-interest, melbourne-3000
Premium fuel users are the new profit margin makers for Australian petrol companies, RAA says
Posted
Only one thing has remained constant in Adelaide's fluctuating fuel market recently — the continual increase in profit margins from premium fuels.
Motorists in Adelaide recently rejoiced when standard unleaded petrol (ULP) prices dropped below 100c per litre.
While some drivers enjoyed financial relief at the bowser, premium fuel purchasers have actually been paying a higher margin on their fuels than ever before.
Royal Automotive Association of South Australia (RAA) senior analyst Chris West said data it had collected showed petrol companies had been slowly increasing the mark-up on premium fuels.
The growing gap between standard and premium fuels
The RAA began average price comparisons of ULP in the last quarter of 2010.
Final quarter 2010 figures showed 91 ULP (standard) at 124.2 cents per litre, with the premium fuels 95 ULP (9.3 cents) and 98 ULP (14.1 cents) higher.
At the end of 2015, margins had grown to 11.8 cents per litre for 95 ULP and 18.0 cents per litre for 98 ULP.
"It is growing, at this stage, at about 1 cent per year," Mr West said.
Retailers are noticing that people are becoming addicted to using those blends. RAA senior analyst Chris West
He said clever marketing had most motorists believing their vehicles required the premium fuels.
"Retailers are noticing that people are becoming addicted to using those blends when perhaps they shouldn't," he said.
"It is really important to use the blends required for your car but understand that many vehicle manufacturers now give you a minimum blend and a recommended blend.
"It is really important to check your user manual to find out exactly what sort of fuel you could be using."
Mr West said the average motorist could save several hundreds of dollars per year by switching.
"Switching down to the regular unleaded, you are saving 10 to 11 cents per litre," he said.
"That is a significant saving over a long period of time."
Mr West added as suppliers continued to extend the margin between the standard and premium blends, savings would grow.
Cheaper displayed price lures premium fuel users
Mr West said while New South Wales had introduced legislation for petrol stations to display the price of their two best-selling ULP blends, SA motorists were still being caught out at the bowser.
"It is really important that our service stations actually display all of the fuel blends they sell on their street boards," he said.
Switching down to the regular unleaded, you are saving 10 to 11 cents per litre. RAA senior analyst Chris West
Many motorists were also being caught by stations removing 95 ULP pumps.
"We are noticing some major brands are phasing out 95 and just offering 91 and 98," Mr West said.
"It's an easy way for retailers now to get extra profits by doing just that."
Mr West said South Australian drivers primarily purchased 91 blend, with premium fuels making up 15 to 20 per cent of all fuels sales.
He said he expected premium blend shares to grow as people purchased newer vehicles.
"We are concerned that 95 and 98 motorists are copping high prices overall and the prices are getting higher quicker because the gap is growing over time," Mr West said.
Topics: oil-and-gas, road-transport, human-interest, adelaide-5000
Scott Morrison would be better off ignoring Peter Costello's surplus advice
Updated
The Australian economy was in a very different position in the mid-90s. The last thing we need is the budget advice of a former treasurer still living in the past, writes Greg Jericho.
One of the worst aspects of economic debate in this country is the view that a budget surplus is an inherent good that signifies good economic management.
Former Treasurer Peter Costello is the lead pontificator of this view and on the weekend he suggested the budget could be back in surplus in two years if the government had the will.
It is advice that the current Treasurer, Scott Morrison, would be well advised to completely ignore.
Last Saturday evening, former Treasurer Peter Costello decided to weigh into the budget debate with a speech delivered to the Young Liberals in Canberra. Costello argued that Scott Morrison should be seeking to return the budget to surplus in two years like he did in 1996-97 and 1997-98.
He argued that "not only was the government's deficit position similar 20 years ago, but so too was the debt position".
Costello believes the problem is a failure to set a target and stick with it, saying:
There is historical precedent for fixing a budget in this position. But if we are to do it, we must clearly set out that goal.
Alas, not surprisingly given the speaker and the function, this analysis lacked any great insight. On the surface, the current budget position might look the same as in 1996, but a closer examination shows great differences, and more importantly the Australian economy is in a very different position to what it was in the mid-1990s.
One would hope our current Treasurer would dismiss such calls as those akin to 40-year-olds like myself telling kids that if they got their act in gear, the Hottest 100 could have a lot more rock music like it did in the 1990s.
But Scott Morrison not only looks to be on board with Costello's surplus mania, he has even taken it a step further, suggesting there are good and bad surpluses. A bad surplus in Morrison's view is one achieved when government expenditure is above 25 per cent of GDP.
He told Sky News:
In the last 30 years there has only been one year in which a surplus has been achieved, where expenditure to GDP has been more than a quarter of the economy, and that was in 2001.
Now if we wanted to split hairs we'd point out in 1987-88 there was also a budget surplus where spending was above 25 per cent of GDP, but other than that, Morrison is correct:
His view that a surplus achieved with expenditure less than 25 per cent of GDP is "a sustainable surplus based on an expenditure level which is achievable" rather mimics the talk of Peter Costello when he suggested in his speech that "the budget problem is that spending close to 26 per cent of GDP is still at the 'temporary' and 'emergency' level that Kevin Rudd introduced in 2008".
Costello also suggested that "if we could get back to where it was before then (and no one was starving in the street at those levels) the budget would now be in surplus".
Both men as usual ignore the revenue side.
Costello loves to recall the 2007-08 budget which had the lowest spending in his time as Treasurer of just 23.1 per cent of GDP, and Morrison might think spending over 25 per cent is somehow bad. But both forget the level of revenue that was raised during all the surplus years.
Sure, there haven't been many surpluses with expenditure over 25 per cent of GDP, but neither have there been many with revenue less than 25 per cent of GDP.
During Costello's time as Treasurer, only once did he deliver a surplus with revenue below that level - his first in 1998-99.
And when was the last year that revenue was higher than 25 per cent of GDP? Why, it was 2007-08, not coincidentally the last year we had a budget surplus.
In the nine years in which Costello delivered a budget surplus, government revenue averaged 25.3 per cent of GDP. Since 2008-09, it has averaged 22.7 per cent of GDP. And even with the best hopes in the budget papers, revenue by 2018-19 is expected to get to just 24.8 per cent of GDP.
And bear in mind, this, Morrison believes, needs to come down.
At least Morrison, unlike Costello, is able to see the difference between the economic situation he inherits and the one Costello had in August 1996.
Take GDP growth. In the four years prior to 1996-97, when Costello began cutting the budget deficit, Australia's economy never grew by less than 3.9 per cent in a financial year; whereas in the past three years, our GDP has not grown by more than 2.5 per cent:
In 1996, the economy was zooming out of the recession; whereas now it is still just bumping along.
But for the budget's purpose, nominal GDP is the more important figure - strong nominal GDP growth correlates strongly with revenue growth. Prior to Costello's first budget, nominal GDP was growing between 5 per cent-6.7 per cent and rising (for his entire period as Treasurer it never grew by less than 5.2 per cent).
In the past three years, the fastest nominal GDP has grown is 3.9 per cent and in 2014-15 it grew by a record low 1.6 per cent:
The main reason to run a surplus is because the private sector is growing so well a deficit would overheat the economy - causing inflation to rise. In the years before the 1996 budget, inflation was back on the rise - going above the RBA target range of 3 per cent in both 1994-95 and 1995-96. It was a good time for the government to cut the deficit.
In 2014-15, inflation rose by just 1.5 per cent:
Among the reasons for low inflation at the moment is that there is bugger all demand in the economy - there has been declining private investment from the mining sector and not enough from the rest of the economy to make up for it:
By contrast, back in the 1990s demand in the economy was going gangbusters. The time was perfect to cut the deficit - indeed, that is what the ALP had done in the previous two years before Costello took over. The deficit had been cut by 1 per cent of GDP in 1994-95; by 0.8 per cent of GDP in 1995-96. Costello then cut it by 1.0 per cent of GDP in 1996-97 and 1.1 per cent of GDP in 1997-98.
And the crucial point about moving to surplus is not what the budget situation is in any one year, but what is the change from the previous year.
Is the budget designed to take momentum out of the economy (i.e. by reducing the deficit or increasing the surplus), or is it designed to stimulate the economy (by increasing the deficit or reducing the surplus)?
Reducing the deficit now in such a way as to try to be in balance within two years would require slamming on the fiscal brakes at a time when the Australian economy is barely in second gear.
This is even more clear when you look at the growth in real net national disposable income - the ABS's measure of "national economic well-being".
In the 1990s, things were looking great, as they were in the early 2010s, but then the mining boom ended. The past three years have seen Australia's national income stagnate in a manner usually associated with a deep recession:
The current path to surplus is slow and steady; it is a path that recognises the current state of the Australian economy. The last thing we need is the advice of a former treasurer still living in the past.
Greg Jericho writes weekly for The Drum. He tweets at @grogsgamut.
Topics: budget, scott-morrison
First posted
Radar the Staffordshire bull terrier cross looks out from his pen at the Weston facility. (27 January 2016)
Posted
Radar the Staffordshire bull terrier cross looks out from his pen at the Weston facility. (27 January 2016)
Topics: animals, human-interest, canberra-2600, act
How to capitalise on export markets, free trade agreements and the potential rivers of gold flowing from sending produce overseas.
Posted
Angove Family Winemakers Jonathon O'Neill, Citrus Australia's Judith Damiani and Lawyer Andrea Michaels discuss what you need to know when it comes to breaking into the export market Full story here
Source: ABC Rural | Duration: 17min 44sec
Topics: trade, agricultural-policy, agricultural-prices, adelaide-5000, mildura-3500
Toddler with genital redness observed 'cowering' around paedophile Shannon McCoole
Updated
A toddler who was abused by paedophile carer Shannon McCoole appeared to "cower" around him and was observed with redness on her genitals that staff assumed was nappy rash, a royal commission has heard.
Key points: Co-workers raise red flags about McCoole
A toddler was seen touching and playing with dolls sexually and violently
A witness says McCoole kept a phone used by a boy to photograph his own genitals
McCoole, a former Families SA youth worker, is serving a 35-year jail sentence for sexually abusing young children in state care.
The Child Protection Systems Royal Commission was prompted by McCoole's conviction and is examining his employment, supervision and a series of "red flags" that were raised about him by co-workers.
Some of McCoole's colleagues gave evidence about observations they made about an 18-month-old-girl who McCoole was later convicted of sexually abusing.
One witness said she observed the toddler had redness around her genitals, which she thought was nappy rash but said it was odd because the toddler only wore nappies at night.
"She was red down there ... I was wondering why she would have that given she wasn't in nappies at the time," she said.
She said she also observed sexualised behaviours in the child, including seeing her play with dolls sexually and violently by touching them "between the legs" then "stomping on their heads".
She said she called in a locum doctor to assess the toddler after finding her curled up inside a box with teddy bears at the start of her shift.
The witness said it was unusual because the child would always run up to her when she started.
She told the commission that the locum said there nothing wrong with the girl.
Another carer said she observed the girl "cower" around McCoole but thought it was because of his imposing physical size and loud voice.
McCoole had a phone used by boy to 'photograph genitals'
Witnesses also told the commission a boy had shown increased sexualised behaviour when cared for by McCoole, but some of that behaviour stopped after McCoole stopped working at the house.
Witnesses said the boy had once used a mobile phone to take photographs of his own genitals.
When the photographs were discovered it was reported to the youth workers' seniors.
It [the phone] should not have been in the hands of anyone apart from IT, which should have destroyed it. Royal commission witness
One witness said McCoole told her he was asked by management to take the photographs off the phone and email them to management.
She said she later saw McCoole with the phone.
"He said 'look what I have, look what I have' and was holding up the phone," the witness said.
She said she was extremely surprised and disappointed McCoole had the phone with the photographs of the boy's genitals.
"It should not have been in the hands of anyone apart from IT, which should have destroyed it," the witness said.
McCoole was convicted of sex offences against seven children, but the boy was not among the victims he was charged for.
The commission also heard the boy would bath with multiple layers of clothes on and never wanted the bathroom door shut, but said that changed after McCoole stopped working at the house.
"It was very shortly after Shannon had left," a witness said.
"The [bathroom] door was shut [and] we were like 'OK. Obviously he wants the door shut,' and we saw his clothes were dry on the bathroom floor so he had bathed naked."
Boy 'changed behaviour' after McCoole left the house
Witnesses also said the boy slept underneath his bed but started sleeping on top of his bed after McCoole stopped working at the house.
One witness also told the commission she reported an incident when the boy had drawn a picture of two penises on his bedroom wall.
One was larger and had an "angry face" and appeared to be ejaculating and the other one next to it was smaller and had a "sad face with tears".
The witness said when she asked the boy about it he seemed unusually shy and withdrawn.
"His attitude when he explained it was a bit off," she said.
"Normally when we found penises on the wall he would be quite proud of himself but when I found this one he seemed quite reserved and quiet ... it appeared he didn't want to talk about it.
"It looked more like abuse, only because of the emotion that it was an angry face and a sad face and had semen coming out. It was different compared to other ones."
The witness said she logged the incident and also raised it with her seniors, including sending them a picture of the drawing.
She said she was told not to talk to the child about his sexualised behaviour because she was not a psychologist.
Another witness said, in retrospect, she felt the boy was intimidated by McCoole.
She said she did not like working with McCoole because he was arrogant and controlling and often made sexist remarks.
Boy 'removed' pictures of paedophile from roster
The witnesses also told the commission the boy had taken pictures of McCoole off a photo roster of staff members that had been placed on the wall.
They said he repeatedly removed the photos and, when they were replaced, the photos would go missing again.
"I can't remember if he put them in the bin or hid them but I don't think we found them again," one witness said.
Topics: courts-and-trials, law-crime-and-justice, child-abuse, government-and-politics, adelaide-5000, sa
First posted
'Good news on local job front' as Rio Tinto offloads Mt Pleasant mine in Hunter Valley
Updated
Confirmation that Rio Tinto will sell its non-operational Mount Pleasant mine in the New South Wales Hunter Valley to MACH Energy Australia is good news for the community, the local mayor says.
As Rio Tinto continues to offload its coal assets, a binding agreement for the asset near Muswellbrook has been reached for a value of $US224 million.
MACH is owned by Indonesia's largest conglomerate, the Salim Group, which has interests in food processing, palm oil, logging and recreation, as well as resources.
Muswellbrook Mayor Martin Rush said with talks already underway to start work at the site, it was good news on the local job front.
Mount Pleasant now looks as though it might actually get a start. It's a mine with a very efficient and good resource, with relatively low land use conflicts in so far as its neighbours are concerned. Martin Rush, Muswellbrook mayor
"Everyone has been waiting for some time for Mount Pleasant to get going," he said.
"Its modified consent now dates from 1999, and there's not a long period of time left on its present consent.
"They've been negotiating with council for some early works to start perhaps in the second quarter of this year.
"I think it will be well received by the community."
The deal brings Rio Tinto's announced or completed divestments to a total of $US4.7 billion since January 2013.
Cr Rush said talks were underway with the council for initial works to potentially start mining Mount Pleasant in the second quarter of this year.
"I think it'll be well received by the community, that Mount Pleasant now looks as though it might actually get a start," he said.
"That will bring some economic boost to the Upper Hunter community.
"It's a mine with a very efficient and good resource, with relatively low land use conflicts in so far as its neighbours are concerned."
Topics: coal, mining-industry, muswellbrook-2333, newcastle-2300
First posted
Australia v India: David Warner shrugs off 'added pressure' of television communication while batting
Updated
Australian opener David Warner says he feels "no added pressure" when sharing his thoughts to television broadcasters during matches after Steve Smith's recent dismissal against India sparked criticism.
"We've been doing that for the past few years," Warner said.
"It's great being able to give people at home communication of why we're doing some things in certain situations.
"Obviously it's not in the interest of Channel Nine to disturb us while we're out there and for us to be dismissed. It's upon us for us to be responsible and professional.
"We've done it in the Big Bash, we've done it plenty of times with Channel Nine.
"For me, I've been doing it all the time, I feel no added pressure."
It's great being able to give people at home communication of why we're doing some things in certain situations. David Warner
The comments follow Smith's dismissal against India during Australia's Twenty20 loss in Adelaide, where the Test and one-day international captain was peppered with questions by the Channel Nine commentary team using wireless mic technology, both at the non-strikers end and at the batter's crease awaiting delivery.
While often struggling to hear the commentators, Smith was asked to call an over by Channel Nine's Mark Nicholas, replying "I'll see what I can do for you".
In the last delivery of that over, Smith was caught by Virat Kohli after poking a ball towards cover. Kohli gave his opposite number a pointed send off, indicating with his hands to Smith that he should not have been chatting.
Warner would not be drawn on whether he though Kohli went too far.
"I'm going to bite my tongue a bit on that situation." Warner said.
"At the end of the day that's just cricket, that's what happens. If the umpire's take action, then they will take action. If they don't, we just take it on the chin."
Australia has spin concerns ahead of World T20
The absence of the in form Usman Khawaja was noticeable on Tuesday night with Shane Watson, Chris Lynn and debutant Travis Head all struggling to play the slow moving, spinning ball.
"Obviously there's been a lot of hype and talk over Usman Khuwaja," Warner said.
"But at the end of the day, if you can tell us who to leave out you've probably got a discussion there.
It's something we always speak about. In those middle overs, a lot of us get carried away with playing big shots. David Warner
"That's the nature of the beast. You've got to keep scoring runs. At the end of the day, we're in a great spot."
Warner conceded that spin was something the team was working hard on trying to address.
"It's something we've got to improve on." he said.
"It's something we always speak about. In those middle overs, a lot of us get carried away with playing big shots and not taking advantage of big fields in Australia.
"In India you can get away with trying to hit boundaries, because it's a bit smaller.
"Our basic batting wasn't there last night."
Warner said the experience of the India Twenty20 team was apparent last night, and believed the Australia team is looking for a similar mix in their squad - both during the current Twenty20 series and the looming World Twenty20.
"We've all played in India, we know what conditions we're going to get," Warner said.
"If you look at the draw, we're playing in Bangalore and Dharamsala, which are pretty much like Australia. Obviously it's going to be a different story in Kolkata. It's going to turn, low and slow.
"We have to adapt there. The big word - experience - plays a massive role in this format.
"When you have guys like Shane Watson coming back into the team, and Steve Smith and myself, who have played over there numerous times, it gives us a whole lot of experience."
The second Twenty20 match between India and Australia will be played on Friday at the MCG.
Topics: cricket, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Perth gas installation safety issues under control, Minister says
Posted
The WA Commerce Minister has moved to allay concerns about a serious safety problem with gas installations in 900 Perth apartment blocks, saying the situation is "under control".
Michael Mischin said the energy safety regulator, EnergySafety, and the operator of the Perth gas network, ATCO Gas Australia, were addressing the safety risk by making the most urgent cases a priority.
"They are going through it in a targeted way, dealing with the operator ATCO in order to address each of those issues in turn and so they will have prioritised their activities on it," he said.
"I'm satisfied the matter is under control."
Mr Mischin made his comments in response to a report by EnergySafety tabled in the WA Parliament on Monday that highlighted concerns about the safety of multi-storey gas installations in big blocks of flats.
The 900 apartment blocks in question are located across the Perth metropolitan area, particularly in older suburbs.
The report highlighted serious safety problems including instantaneous gas hot water systems with incorrect flue capacity, and/or a connection to flues containing asbestos.
"This is a concern for both the network operator [ATCO] and EnergySafety," the report said.
The report said while the risk was first identified in 2010-11, only 134 risky gas installations had been fixed.
EnergySafety director Ken Bowron said in a written response that scoping work to fix the problems began after the completion of a 2010-11 survey which identified the unsafe gas installations.
He said the most serious problems were fixed first and included asbestos in flues, water heater locations and an incorrect fluing capacity.
"The risks were ranked in order of importance, with those with the highest risk — and usually the most complex work — to be completed first in order to reduce any risk as quickly as possible," Mr Bowron said.
"The remainder will take less time to fix."
Mr Bowron said the safety risks of the remaining installations were serious but often not urgent, with some existing for several decades.
Topics: electricity-energy-and-utilities, perth-6000
Alleged Boxing Day attacker Shaun Rudder applies for bail
Posted
A Newcastle man whose alleged Boxing Day bashing of two women caused a social media backlash has applied for bail, with his lawyer noting discrepancies in the case.
Pictures of a battered and bruised Brittany Merrick went viral on social media after the alleged bashing.
The 22-year-old woman had told police 26-year-old Shaun Rudder bashed her and her friend after they left a nightclub.
Rudder was originally granted bail but it was revoked after community outrage.
Magistrate Ian Cheetham on Wednesday allowed Rudder to make a fresh application for bail, after the defence argued there were inconsistencies in the case.
Rudder's lawyer Kenneth Wilks noted footage allegedly showing Ms Merrick attacking his client inside the nightclub was not mentioned in police facts.
He also told the court that text messages police relied on may have been out of context.
Mr Wilks said he had tried to clarify a timeline for the text messages, but said he had been denied access by police.
He also took issue with claims his client had links to a bikie gang, noting both alleged victims made no mention of that.
The police officer in charge told the court he had made a note on Rudder's alleged link to the Rebels motorcycle gang.
He told the court the note related to one of the victims alleging Rudder threatened them, after disclosing the alleged links.
Magistrate Cheetham had earlier ruled that any alleged link to a bikie gang was not relevant in relation to a bail application.
The officer in charge argued that the police brief was not complete.
Magistrate Cheetham will make a ruling on the bail application on Monday.
Topics: law-crime-and-justice, newcastle-2300
Patrick Hill, chairman of the Outback Way lobby group, says cross-border collaboration and scrutinising costs will help to seal the Outback Way sooner
Posted
Patrick Hill, chairman of the Outback way lobby group, says cross-border collaboration and scrutinising costs will help to seal the Outback way sooner. Read more.
Source: ABC Rural | Duration: 7min 41sec
Topics: rural, road-transport, livestock, agribusiness, alice-springs-0870
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Astronomers unfazed by theory aliens could already be extinct
Updated
As the biggest-ever search for alien life gets underway this year, two Australian researchers have suggested life on other planets could already be extinct.
Charley Lineweaver from the Australian National University has co-authored a research paper suggesting life on other planets could have already died away.
It argues early life is fragile, and it rarely evolves quickly enough to survive.
Dr Lineweaver said it was possible aliens had not been able to regulate their environment to keep climatic conditions stable.
The research looking at how life might develop showed new life would commonly die out because of extreme heating or cooling on planets.
"The more we look, we don't see any signal at all or any evidence for this intelligent alien life," Dr Lineweaver said.
"One explanation for that might be that human-like intelligence is something that doesn't evolve very commonly at all.
"The life that starts to emerge on all these wet-rocky planets that we now know are common, just gets snuffed out by either giant impacts or an inability to control what is more natural, and that is the runaway greenhouse effects or the runaway glaciation."
Lead author Dr Aditya Chopra said most early planetary environments were unstable.
"Early life is fragile, so we believe it rarely evolves quickly enough to survive," he said.
The study results come as the Parkes CSIRO telescope in central west New South Wales prepares to take part in a $100 million initiative backed by cosmologist Stephen Hawking to find aliens.
Dr Lineweaver admitted his research might dampen the enthusiasm around the project.
"Well what it does is undermine one of the large motivations for such a search, and that is not only could humanlike intelligence be very rare, but we think life itself could be very, very rare," he said.
Project will lead to breakthroughs: CSIRO
Glen Nagle from the CSIRO NASA Tracking Station in Canberra said the chance of finding intelligent life on other planets should not be ruled out.
He said the multi-million-dollar investment at Parkes would bring a range of spin-offs.
"You know it's a five-year search, it's going to be using about 25 per cent of the antenna's time at Parkes," Mr Nagle said.
"Some radio astronomers may feel 'well is that a great use'?
"But one of the great benefits will come from this, even if we don't pick up any signal and the chances of it are literally astronomical, then we're going to be actually, developing incredible new technologies with that money."
Mr Nagle said the technology could lead to any number of breakthroughs both in and outside astronomy circles.
"Just the computing power that could be developed through this particular initiative could change the way we do communications on this planet," Mr Nagle said.
"The way we analyse research and algorithms used to actually do research into things like cancer, or develop more improved financial systems, data encryption, the list goes on and on and on," Mr Nagle said.
Dr Lineweaver said he agreed that his theory should not spell the end of a search for other life.
"The paper that we've written undermines the motivation for it, but, for example, look at Christopher Columbus," Associate Professor Lineweaver said.
"He found the new world not because he was looking for this new world, he was looking for a spice route to India, as a matter of fact he died thinking he'd discovered India.
"It's crazy but that's the way scientific things are done and I think, explore, explore, you'll find out stuff you were never even looking for," Dr Lineweaver said.
Topics: astronomy-space, parkes-2870
First posted
French justice minister Christiane Taubira quits over plans to strip dual-nationals' citizenship
Posted
French Justice Minister Christiane Taubira has quit, apparently in protest at government moves to push through a measure that would strip convicted French-born terrorists of their citizenship if they have a second nationality.
Key points: Jean-Jacques Urvoas named as successor to "carry out the constitutional reform"
String of measures to be introduced to boost security in the wake of terror attacks in Paris
Reforms also aim to inscribe the right to declare a state of emergency into the constitution
Ms Taubira, a popular figure among the governing Socialists of President Francois Hollande but a target of criticism for the right-wing Republicans, tweeted: "Sometimes to resist means staying, sometimes resisting means leaving".
Mr Hollande named Jean-Jacques Urvoas, the current president of the parliamentary laws commission, as Ms Taubira's successor to "carry out... the constitutional reform", according to a justice ministry statement.
The French President called for the "loss of nationality" measure to be written into the constitution in the aftermath of the November jihadist attacks in Paris which left 130 people dead.
It is part of a string of measures meant to boost security as hundreds of French citizens - many holding dual nationality - leave to fight alongside the Islamic State group in Iraq and Syria, and in the case the attackers, return to wreak devastation in France.
"Removing French nationality from those who blindly kill other French in the name of an ideology of terror is a strong symbolic act against those who have excluded themselves from the national community," Prime Minister Manuel Valls said after the measure was announced.
However the proposal has been deeply divisive, and put Ms Taubira at loggerheads with her own government.
Just a day before the reforms were presented, Ms Taubira announced the citizenship measure would be dropped because it was discriminatory, only to be overruled at the last minute by Mr Hollande.
The reforms also aim to inscribe the right to declare a state of emergency into the constitution, including powers to raid homes and place people under house arrest without judicial oversight.
Parliament will start debating the reforms in early February.
The Government's plans to extend a current three-month state of emergency, which expires on February 26, have been criticised by rights activists.
AFP
Topics: world-politics, terrorism, france
Rio Tinto sells Mt Pleasant coal mine site to Indonesia's MACH Energy
Posted
Mining giant Rio Tinto has continued to scale down its Australian coal interests with the sale of its Mount Pleasant mine to Indonesian interests.
Rio Tinto said it had reached a binding agreement to sell the Hunter Valley thermal coal asset to MACH Energy Australia for $US224 million ($320 million) plus a share of future royalties.
However, the royalty payments only kick-in once the coal price exceeds $US72.50 per tonne, well above the current level of around $US43 per tonne.
MACH is owned by Indonesia's largest conglomerate, the Salim Group, which has interests in food processing, palm oil, logging and recreation, as well as resources.
Rio has now offloaded $US830 million ($1.2 billion) worth of coal assets in recent months following the sale of its interest in the neighbouring Bengalla coal joint-venture late last year.
Mount Pleasant was one of Rio's largest undeveloped coal assets with total marketable reserves of 474 million tonnes.
The sale follows continued weakness in coal prices despite numerous mine closures and millions of tonnes of production being removed from the market.
A recent survey by global energy analysts Wood Mackenzie found that around a third of Australian coal mines would be losing money at current prices.
Rio Tinto Copper & Coal chief executive Jean-Sebastien Jacques said the recent asset sales delivered significant value for shareholders.
"We believe Mount Pleasant can have a very positive future under its new owners with different priorities for development and capital allocation," Mr Jacques said.
Rio Tinto's senior management has repeatedly said it is open to more asset sales and would consider any deal that that offered more than the company's internal valuation.
The company has announced a total of $US4.7 billion ($6.7 billion) of asset sales since early 2013.
Rio Tinto will continue to focus its coal production in the Hunter Valley at its Mount Thorley open-cut mine which employs around 1,300 workers.
Topics: coal, takeovers, company-news, australia, newcastle-2300, nsw, mount-pleasant-2519
Police searching for man following 'brazen' sexual assault on teenage boy on Sunshine Coast
Posted
Queensland police are searching for a man who allegedly indecently assaulted a 13-year-old boy on the Sunshine Coast last Thursday.
The incident, which occurred at a Buderim supermarket, has been described by police as "brazen".
Detective Senior Sergeant Phil Hurst said a 13-year-old boy was "inappropriately touched" and advised anyone who recognised the man to contact police.
"The assault matter that we're investigating is of such a nature that there would be a concern that he poses a greater risk," he said.
"So obviously we are concerned to identify this person as quickly as we possibly can and speak to them in relation to the matter.
"There's been an assault which was an inappropriate touching out in a public place, which would indicate there would be a greater public interest in identifying who this person is."
Detective Senior Sergeant Hurst said the man appeared to be in his 60s or 70s.
The man is about 168 centimetres tall and was believed to have been shopping with an elderly woman.
The man was also seen driving a white sedan.
Topics: law-crime-and-justice, crime, assault, sexual-offences, buderim-4556, qld
Noel Pearson 'regrets' coup against Tony Abbott, says Indigenous affairs in 'deep crisis'
Updated
Aboriginal leader Noel Pearson says he regrets Tony Abbott's prime ministership being cut short, given the former leader's commitment to Indigenous issues.
Key points: Pearson says Abbott would have achieved more in Indigenous areas
Says left and right too divided to find policy solutions
Slams the speed of progress in Indigenous affairs
Mr Abbott declared himself the "Prime Minister for Indigenous affairs", visited two remote communities and brought many Indigenous affairs public servants into his department.
Delivering the first National Press Club address of 2016, Mr Pearson also praised current Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, but said Mr Abbott had started to make changes and would have achieved more.
"It was cut short. I think there's been few people more genuinely signed up to our cause than him. I regret his passing," Mr Pearson said.
"It was essential that a conservative start the kick-off. I've always believed that. [Former United States president Richard] Nixon had to go to China and a conservative had to kick this ball along the road.
"We now have the blessing that the current Prime Minister is a long supporter of a new relationship with our people ... so in some sense we've got the best of both worlds."
In a wide-ranging address, the eminent Cape York leader declared Indigenous affairs was in "deep crisis", and urged politicians to strive for the "radical centre" in Australian politics.
Mr Pearson said the left and right of politics were continually at war and could not find policy solutions.
"If politics is necessarily about tension and struggle then the radical centre is the highest compromise," he said.
"The glaring omission in Australia's political landscape is the absence of political representation hunting for that centre.
"We need a new democrat with new philosophy, with a higher purpose than simply keeping the bastards honest. We need a great connector between the red and the blue."
Mr Pearson named South Australian senator Nick Xenophon as the politician closest to his ideal centrist.
He also slammed the speed of progress in Indigenous affairs.
"Make no mistake: Indigenous affairs is in deep crisis," he said.
"We are seeing good things in isolated areas but not seeing the tectonic shifts that are needed.
"The current situation is one where the investment today in Indigenous affairs is $34 billion per annum sunk through government departments, outsourced to NGOs and for-profit organisations.
"That $34 billion a year is not yielding the kind of return that I saw in ATSIC's day," he added, referring to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission abolished under the Howard government.
Make no mistake: Indigenous affairs is in deep crisis. We are seeing good things in isolated areas but not seeing the tectonic shifts that are needed. Noel Pearson
Mr Pearson said he was very optimistic that Indigenous people would be acknowledged in the constitution.
Mr Pearson is a member of the recently-formed bipartisan Referendum Council that will advise Parliament later this year.
He called for a centrist position to be found that is acceptable to all sides of the recognition debate, including constitutional conservatives.
"Too much left won't work, too much right won't work, too much overreach won't work and too much miserable under-reach will not either," he said.
"The window of constitutional opportunity is extremely narrow between left and right.
"The challenge is to produce a model and prosecute a politics capable of spearing through that window."
Topics: indigenous-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander, community-and-society, indigenous-policy, indigenous-other-peoples, laws, federal-government, federal-parliament, government-and-politics, canberra-2600, australia
First posted
Rio Olympics: James Magnussen to test shoulder in build-up to Games trials
Posted
Olympic silver medallist James Magnussen will ramp up his preparations for the Australian trials after getting the call-up for next week's Perth Aquatic Super Series against China and Japan.
Magnussen made a successful return from shoulder surgery at last week's Victorian Championships with victories in the 50 metres and 100 metres freestyle.
It was a far cry from the middle of last year, when the two-time world 100m freestyle champion was forced to go under the knife after losing about 70 per cent of his power in his badly damaged left shoulder.
The 24-year-old, who claimed silver in the 100m freestyle at the London Olympics, faces an uphill battle to regain peak form and fitness in time for the Rio de Janeiro Games, where he will chase an elusive gold medal.
But he is determined to give himself the best chance he can, with the Aquatic Super Series a perfect tester for where he sits.
Magnussen won the 50m freestyle in 22.51 and the 100m in 49.35 in his Melbourne return, but admits he had been worried leading into the meet about how his shoulder would cope.
"It actually came through with flying colours in what was definitely a big first step up," he said.
"I will knuckle down between now and next week [with coach Mitch Falvey] on some specific speed work.
"We have come off a block of work on my fitness and it's good to get that feel back and get a race under my belt and to now work on a few more specifics."
After the Perth meet, Magnussen will race in the New South Wales Championships in March, before fronting up for the Olympic trials in April in Adelaide.
The Perth Aquatic Super Series will be held on February 5 and 6.
AAP
Topics: swimming, sport, olympics-summer, perth-6000
Wei Li tells SA court he killed mother in self-defence over anger about piano practice
Posted
An Adelaide student who is accused of murdering his mother has told a court he fought back in self-defence after she got angry that he was not practising piano.
Key points: Accused man Wei Li said his mother demanded he reach professional pianist standard
He said a beating resulted if his school report card was not straight As
Court heard of online searches about stabbing, avoiding police and phone tracking
Wei Li, also known as Daniel, told a jury in Adelaide his mother "just came at me out of nowhere" in March 2011 at the family's Burnside home.
Li, 22, said his mother Emma Mae Tian, 41, yelled and screamed because he did not want to do piano practice.
He said his mother had something in her hand and he was unable to reason with her.
"I think she wanted to kill me, I had to fight back, I had to stop her," he told the court.
The law student said he was unable to remember anything beyond that point.
The court was told previously Ms Tian was attacked with a metal pole, was strangled and suffered more than 50 injuries.
Her body was found days after the attack, wrapped in blood-soaked sheets on a lounge room floor.
Li said he wrapped the body "out of respect" and "nothing after that point was rational".
He told the court his mother had wanted him to reach professional standard on the piano.
"I started playing the piano when I was about three years old," he said.
"My mother very much emphasised my piano training."
Son beaten if report card was not straight As, court told
The former Prince Alfred College student said his mother had never been satisfied with his marks.
"If I don't get a straight A in a school report that would result in a beating," he said.
It got so bad that she started beating me on a daily basis. Wei Li
He spoke of a time when they had been very close.
"Our relationship in the beginning it was good," he said.
"[There was] a very gradual transition … it got so bad that she started beating me on a daily basis."
Li's father was in China on business at the time his wife died and the son bought a flight to Melbourne, then later travelled to China, where authorities located him about three years later.
The court was told Li had used his laptop computer about the time his mother died to find a video about tying knots.
He also did online searches about stabbing, avoiding police and mobile phone tracking.
Li told the court he had thought about suicide since he was 12 and researched ways to die.
"I've been obsessed with suicide for a long time," he said.
The accused man denied he intended to murder his mother as "she meant everything to me".
Topics: crime, murder-and-manslaughter, law-crime-and-justice, burnside-5066, adelaide-5000, sa, china
Social media campaign kicks off women's footy in Sunraysia
Posted
Sunraysia will see its first official women's football match this year, after a female-only competition was given the go-ahead.
The competition will initially involve four AFL teams playing alongside regular matches in the Millewa League, with organisers hoping to grow to six teams in the near future.
Co-organiser and Mildura teacher Jenny Donnelly said the competition was only proposed last August, and quickly gained momentum on social media.
"I tried to play footy as a little kid, but then I turned 12 and wasn't allowed to play footy because I was a girl," Ms Donnelly said.
"So fast forward, what feels like 100 years, and a bunch of ex-students asked me why there wasn't footy for women and I said 'I don't really know'."
Social media sparks interest
Ms Donnelly suggested the group start a Facebook page to gauge interest in the local community.
"I said if they got 100 likes by Monday, I'd make the call, and they had 150 by that Monday and over 600 within a month," she said.
The first game will be played in April, with pre-season skills development sessions to take place next month.
Ms Donnelly said she had been "majorly shocked" by how many girls and women had signed up already.
"I thought, there will be a couple here and there ... but after our first two 'come and try' sessions, it was amazing."
As for their male counterparts, Ms Donnelly said they had also been keen to get on board with the competition.
"At first I think they were a little bit shocked and thought, 'oh it's a gimmick, they're not that keen'," she said.
"Then suddenly, it was like all the clubs didn't want to miss out on having a girls team.
"They've been really supportive, so it's been great," Ms Donnelly said.
AFL Sunraysia football development manager Trevor Ryan said he was only expecting a few trial games to go ahead in 2016 and 2017, but the numbers were there to start a competition.
"I think it's a very exciting time in 2016 as far as a women's competition," Mr Ryan said.
"If we can get four teams off the ground that's a great start.
"It's been really positive. We've had a lot of good feedback from the clubs who want to be involved, and from the girls and women who want to play."
With pre-season training just around the corner, Ms Donnelly said it would probably take a while for her to realise that her students' dream had become a reality.
"It just absolutely went boom in such a short amount of time, and I can't believe it's going to actually happen," she said.
"Aussies love football, and girls are no different."
Topics: sport, australian-football-league, mildura-3500
Community rallies to bring home body of 5yo Byron Bay girl killed in Thailand
Updated
The grief-stricken family of a young Australian girl killed in Thailand has successfully fundraised enough money to bring home her body.
Five-year-old Sonya Davis was killed in a motorcycle accident while visiting family in northern Thailand.
Her family started a fundraising campaign to bring her body back to Australia, to be buried in Byron Bay.
So far the campaign has raised more than $17,000, surpassing their target of $15,000.
According to the fundraising page, additional money raised will help cover the family's living expenses, until they are able to go back to work.
On January 18, Sonya was on her way to the market when a speeding car hit the back of motorbike she was riding on with her grandmother, who was killed instantly.
Sonya was taken to hospital with critical injuries but died on January 22.
Her family said Sonya was a "sparky, happy child" and was "looking forward to starting big school" at Byron Bay Public this year, alongside her brother.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was providing consular assistance to the family.
Topics: death, road, foreign-affairs, byron-bay-2481, lismore-2480
First posted
DNA, video and audio evidence to be used against Victorian police officer Timothy Baker in 2013 murder case
Posted
The prosecution case against a Victorian police officer charged with the murder of a motorist in Windsor two-and-a-half years ago will rely on audio and video recordings from the accused officer's car.
Victoria Police senior constable Timothy Baker appeared before the Melbourne Magistrates' Court charged with one count of shooting Vlado Micetic dead.
The 45-year-old is alleged to have pulled Micetic over late on the evening of August 25, 2013, on Union Street in Windsor.
The court heard the prosecution intends to play audio and video of the incident recorded in Baker's police car.
The prosecution is expected to call more than 20 witnesses - including police officers, DNA experts, the passenger who was in the car at the time of the shooting and members of Mr Micetic's family.
Mental health reports are expected to be used for both Baker and Mr Micetic.
Baker has been suspended from Victoria Police while the case is ongoing.
He was charged in October and is currently on bail.
The committal hearing is expected to begin on August 1 and has been set down for seven days.
Topics: courts-and-trials, law-crime-and-justice, murder-and-manslaughter, crime, melbourne-3000, windsor-3181
Shannon McCoole: Notorious paedophile testifies against alleged administrator of dark net abuse ring
Updated
A notorious Australian paedophile who ran one of the world's biggest child abuse networks has given evidence to a Danish court against a man alleged to have helped him administer the online forum.
Key points: McCoole was quizzed about the Danish accused's role in the child abuse network
The accused "TL" denies being a senior figure in the operation
McCoole told the court in Denmark that TL was respected in child abuse circles
Adelaide man Shannon McCoole was last year sentenced to 35 years in jail for sexually abusing vulnerable children in his care and for running an abuse site on the dark net with 45,000 members worldwide.
McCoole is now in protective custody and under 24-hour surveillance in Adelaide's Yatala Labour Prison.
The ABC can reveal that the 33-year-old last month testified from the prison by videolink in a case that has sent shockwaves around Denmark.
A 48-year-old Dane — known only as "TL" — is accused of abusing four children and of helping McCoole administer the global child abuse forum.
TL has denied being a senior figure in the network, saying he only had a minor role.
"The prosecutor believes the Danish guy was a co-administrator of this very big paedophile network that Shannon McCoole was convicted of being a part of," said Janni Pedersen, a reporter with Denmark's TV2 News who has been covering the case.
"This is a big case here in Denmark ... it was quite a big thing having McCoole [testify] via videolink."
Accused an 'expert' in child pornography, McCoole tells court
Asked in court about TL, McCoole said the Dane was well known and "respected" in child abuse circles.
McCoole was also quizzed about TL's role with the abuse forum.
"He helped me find original child pornography material," he replied.
"In general TL had seen so much material that if he had not seen something before, then it had to be new."
The prosecutor then asked if TL was an expert.
"I would say so, with my knowledge of the paedophile environment," McCoole said.
Journalist Janni Pedersen said: "Having [McCoole] saying in court that the Danish guy who is on trial is actually a co-administrator was a very good point for the prosecutor."
A verdict in TL's trial could be delivered as early as next month.
McCoole was arrested after police from Queensland's Taskforce Argos pieced together clues about his identity by cross-matching an online greeting he used on various web forums.
Once his identity was established, South Australian detectives went to his Adelaide home and discovered evidence — including metadata on a camera and a freckle on McCoole's finger matching one in images of abuse — that proved he was the head administrator of the global abuse site and an active sexual abuser of children in his care.
One of his victims was 18 months old; another was disabled.
Users of the site were ranked according to the volume and originality of the child exploitation material they uploaded.
Members who were promoted would be allowed access into the site's VIP section where graphic images of abuse were kept.
Topics: child-abuse, community-and-society, crime, law-crime-and-justice, courts-and-trials, australia, denmark
First posted
What do producers need to know to tap into export markets and make the most of free trade agreements?
Public Transport Victoria 'fudging' train overcrowding statistics for Melbourne morning peak, Greens say
Posted
Half of Melbourne's morning peak train services are almost double their capacity and transport authorities are covering up the real statistics, according to the Greens.
Key points: Services affected by delayed, cancelled trains not included in stats, Greens say
Lines significantly exceeding 800-passenger capacity benchmark
Victorian Government "working to improve" network's capacity
Data obtained under Freedom of Information showed the capacity on six of the city's 11 rail lines exceeded the 800 passenger benchmark during the morning rush, the party said.
Greens Victorian leader Greg Barber said infrastructure had not kept up with the population boom in parts of the outer suburbs and the city's growth corridors, and accused Public Transport Victoria of "fudging" its statistics.
"The standard is 800 people per train, that's considered to be overloaded, but on most lines pretty close to half the trains are now exceeding that standard," Mr Barber said.
"I think they've broken a new record in this survey because they had 1,262 people on one train [on the Pakenham line]."
He said the survey, which is conducted twice a year, compared figures from May 2015 to the same month in 2014.
"We got the raw data from the survey, and it turns out they've been fudging the figures," Mr Barber said
"Anytime a train gets cancelled or delayed, that causes overcrowding, but they actually exclude that from their figures because they say that's not normal.
"But cancellations and delays are normal, they're happening all the time."
Victorian Government 'getting on' with improving network
Mr Barber said there had been a lack of investment by multiple governments over the past decade to improve the infrastructure needed to run trains more frequently.
"If they don't hurry up and fix the signalling system, make the improvements to allow them to run extra trains, then things will just get worse," he said.
"And they're already pretty bad."
Victorian Public Transport Minister Jacinta Allan said the Government was taking action to improve rail services after the former Coalition government "wasted" its four years in office.
"It's about making sure that the train system has enough trains, enough capacity to move the people who want to use it," Ms Allan said.
"We know more and more people are choosing to use public transport, and with Melbourne's growing population, we know those two factors are adding to it being a service that people are using more and more.
"We want people to use public transport, and that's exactly why the Andrews Government hasn't wasted a moment in getting on with those important public transport projects like ordering bigger trains, improving signalling, getting on with the Metro rail tunnel, removing level crossings, so we can provide that extra capacity."
Topics: state-parliament, states-and-territories, urban-development-and-planning, melbourne-3000, vic
Century-old artefacts revealed as Mawson's Hut cleared of snow and ice
Updated
A team on a six-week mission to dig out one of Mawson's Huts in Antarctica has cleared the last of the snow and ice from the building, revealing artefacts more than 100 years old.
Key points: Expedition to clear last of the snow from one of Mawson's Huts finishes up
Team removed about 35 cubic metres of ice
Objects found inside go a long way towards telling the story of the former occupants
The group has just returned from a mission to Cape Denison in Antarctica as part of the Antarctic Division and Mawson's Hut Foundation's program.
Chainsaws were used to clear thick ice from inside Mawson and his team's main living quarters, uncovering wooden buckets, food cans and balaclavas.
The leader of the expedition, Marty Passingham from the Mawson's Huts Foundation, said the expedition was mainly about removing the last of the ice that had found its way inside the hut.
"It's the first time for a long, long time that we've been able to walk in and get a proper and true sense of how the building was when the AAE expedition was there and living in it, and also the artefacts that we have pulled out help tell the story," he said.
"It's full of amazing things."
Mr Passingham said in previous expeditions the ice build-up inside the hut was from the roof to the floor.
"It's large amounts of ice that have accumulated... the scale of that can happen quite quickly," he said.
"What we're left with was about half-a-metre of ice from the floor up, which had been there for quite some time."
He said it was not until he and his team were ready to say that ice was no longer entering the hut, that they were able to remove the final layer.
"In the late 2000s there was a new roof put on it and we've been monitoring it," he said.
"That layer was probably the most intensive work-wise to move, we used good old-fashioned geo-picks, it was all done by hand, meticulously, right down to the floor level."
He estimated they had removed about 35 cubic metres of ice.
Mr Passingham said the team uncovered a wide range of artefacts, ranging from clothing to food.
"Such as balaclavas, some old-style woollen underwear, there's some jackets hanging around; we uncovered a bowl that had dehydrated peas in it that was sitting on the kitchen," he said.
"All of this really does paint a picture, or tell the story that when the ship turned up to pick them up, they literally did just drop what they were doing, grab their essential personal things and just head on out of there.
"So to find that is a great experience for us and for everyone, really."
He said it went a long way towards telling the story of the former occupants.
"There's hob-nail boots on the floor, there's still books on shelves, there's candles and boxes of matches sitting beside them, so we've very carefully chipped the ice around all of those, and left them in situ, exactly where they were," Mr Passingham said.
He said there were still remnants of broken glass plates in the corner of the famous photographer, Frank Hurley's dark room.
Surprisingly the findings revealed that not much had changed between life in Antarctica then and now.
Mr Passingham said we may now have modern equipment and clothing, but the Mawson's Hut occupants had enough acetylene plant to give them lighting, as well as a large engine with an AC and DC generator.
"So you know, 100 years has gone by and I think we probably, due to modern technology, we probably do do it a bit easier, but essentially it's the same elements that you have to put up with, it's all the same problems," Mr Passingham said.
"And you know, if we have a blizzard, just like they would, you have to go around and assess all our equipment and see what condition it's in after something like that, and clean up, and just like they would have had to.
"So I'd say yep, there are some changes, but essentially it would remain relatively the same: a fairly harsh place to exist."
Topics: research, research-organisations, antarctica, hobart-7000, tas
First posted
Ration Shed renovations to create a space for Cherbourg's Indigenous Elders
Posted
A South Burnett museum and community centre is turning a space that was once a dormitory for Aboriginal boys into a meeting place for Indigenous Elders.
The Cherbourg Ration Shed houses a museum dedicated to the history and culture of the community, as well as being a hub for local projects, groups and services.
In June the Federal Government's Indigenous Advancement Strategy allocated the facility $150,000 to use for renovation work.
Ration Shed chairwoman Sandra Morgan said the work would give their community's Elders a place to meet, rest and reflect.
"Everyday we like to acknowledge our Elders past and present, and this Elders' room will be a place where they can come down privately and have a time out," Ms Morgan said.
The upgrades will also create a dedicated archive space.
"We're moving the Memory Project which is in the administration office over to that space, and the other area close to it will be for the Elders," Ms Morgan said.
The Ration Shed takes its name from the original function of the building, when Cherbourg residents lived under the rule of the Aboriginals Protection Act.
Life in the community was strictly controlled; residents had to ask permission to marry, to access their money, to go to town or to go hunting to supplement their rations.
These rations — dry goods like rice, flour, split peas and tea, as well as basic household supplies like blankets — were doled out from a hatch in a large timber and tin building known as the Ration Shed.
Topics: indigenous-culture, building-and-construction, cherbourg-4605
WA-designed shark detection system 'Clever buoy' to be trialled in NSW
Updated
A WA-designed shark detection system, the "Clever Buoy", will be trialled at Sydney's Bondi beach following a spate of attacks in NSW, but the WA Government remains unconvinced by the new technology.
Key points: System can detect sharks from 250-300 metres away
Trial to be rolled out at five NSW beaches
Despite being designed in WA, no plans to trial it here
The buoys' sonar beams can detect any marine animal over two metres long, according to Perth-based developers, Shark Attack Mitigation Systems.
Current acoustic alerts used by the WA Department of Fisheries only pick up on tagged sharks and work alongside sightings and patrols.
Shark Attack Mitigation System director Craig Anderson said the Clever Buoy had undergone extensive testing in uncontrolled environments, such as Esperance and also controlled environment like the Sydney aquarium.
"Clever buoy is basically like a virtual shark net," he said.
"It uses a combination of multi-spectrum sonar and some software that we have written and co-developed that is very much like facial recognition software for marine life."
The four imaging sonars look for large shark-sized objects and can cover a radius of up to 80 metres. The total combined coverage for each Clever Buoy is around 250-300 metres.
The imagery is then computed into algorithms which use a range of indicators including swimming patterns to determine what type of underwater animal the sensors have detected.
If a shark is identified the Clever Buoy sends a signal to lifeguards who receive the alert on a mobile app.
The NSW Government has committed several million dollars to trial Clever Buoys at five locations, including two in Northern NSW where there has been a spate of attacks, pending a successful trial at Bondi.
The latest version of the Clever Buoy is leaving Perth on Thursday bound for the NSW trial from mid-next month.
No planned rollout for WA beaches
Despite the technology originating in the state, it will not be hitting Western Australian beaches anytime soon.
WA Premier Colin Barnett said his government had concentrated on other shark mitigation strategies, including tagging and researching repellent devices to keep beachgoers safe.
"A lot of our investment now has been in aerial patrols both along Perth beaches and ... in the South West," he said.
"A lot of our investment now has been in aerial patrols ... they are proving to be very effective both in identifying sharks and warning swimmers. WA Premier Colin Barnett
"They are proving to be very effective both in identifying sharks and warning swimmers.
"[We have also made a] big investment in surf lifesaving clubs in terms of their ability and equipment and also the creation of safe swimming areas."
Department of Fisheries' Shark Response Unit head Lisa Clack said they would not be trialling the Clever Buoy, but would be interested in the outcome of the NSW trial.
She said there had been contact between the State Government and Shark Attack Mitigation Systems, however no formal proposal has been received by the government.
In 2013 the WA Government spent $273,000 on a separate sonar research project through Curtin University which also led to a shark detection system.
The researchers are due to finalise the report for the State Government in the coming months.
But researcher Miles Parsons said it appeared there was no funding forthcoming to develop the system further for testing.
"To date we haven't had a response that suggests we will get further funding, but we still need to go through further discussions on that," he said.
Those researchers are also looking to Sydney and private enterprise for funding.
Topics: shark, government-and-politics, inventions, wa, bondi-beach-2026
First posted
Myrtle rust in the Northern Territory causing problems for nurseries
Updated
Nurseries across the Northern Territory are on alert and doing their best to keep the fungal disease known as myrtle rust out of their properties.
The disease, which can kill native plants like gum trees and paperbarks, was found in the Northern Territory for the first time last year, firstly on the Tiwi Islands and then on plants in the Darwin region.
Darryl South runs the largest plant wholesale business in the NT and said while his plants were not infected, the declaration of myrtle rust in the Territory had cost him.
"It's a serious problem because we ship plants all over Australia and the fact that Western Australia in particular will not accept at this point any myrtaceae whatsoever, means we've lost that market.
"It means melaleuca, eucalypts, anything in the myrtaceae group, we can't send to WA at all.
"I predict the way that myrtle rust has spread that won't go on forever, because I'm sure WA will get it as well in due time.
"In the meantime, we've lost a market for all of those myrtaceaes and that has cost us dearly."
Mr South said quarantine officials had been visiting regularly, to check for myrtle rust and his business was continuing to take biosecurity very seriously.
"We don't allow anything in here without a thorough check," he said.
"We have a quarantine area separate to the nursery and anything that comes in, it comes in with certificates and is thoroughly checked.
"We are quite vigilant, it's very important for us," Mr South said.
"I don't think authorities can do that much about it [myrtle rust spreading]. It's just something we'll have to put up with and hopefully it will not affect too many species."
One Top End nursery had plants affected by myrtle rust last year, but has since been cleared after an extensive fungicide application program and removal of affected plants.
Myrtle rust a serious issue
Lecturer in conservation and land management at Charles Darwin University, Samantha Saynor, said a species of lilly pilly on the Tiwi Islands were being affected by myrtle rust, and that strain had also been found in Indonesia.
She said myrtle rust first arrived in Australia in 2010 at Wyong in New South Wales and by 2012 had reached Mackay in Queensland.
In the six years since its introduction it has moved to all states except SA and WA, and two native species of trees have almost been wiped off the map — the scrub turpentine and a native guava.
"It has been identified that over 200 species are affected by this rust, it's huge," she said.
"It is a really big problem, and people don't realise it's going to be an ongoing issue.
"It might not seem so bad this year or next year, but if trees keep getting infected they could be like those two [almost extinct species] over on the east coast."
A myrtle rust workshop is being held at Charles Darwin University on February 5.
Topics: rural, gardening, pests, pest-management, quarantine, darwin-0800
First posted
Tennis match-fixing scandal: review to look at betting companies sponsoring major events
Posted
Authorities say it is a question for the independent review into tennis's anti-corruption unit over whether it is appropriate that betting companies sponsor major tennis events.
Tennis's governing bodies on Wednesday announced the independent review following recent allegations of failing to pursue evidence of alleged match-fixing.
Advertisements for William Hill - an official partner of the Australian Open - are being displayed in three areas during the tournament.
Tennis Integrity Board and Wimbledon chairman Philip Brook said betting companies' sponsorship is not in breach of any of the governing bodies' current rules, but says the appropriateness will be a question for the review panel.
"It's currently allowed under the rules of the tennis anti-corruption program. So the Australian Open is not in breach of anything that currently is within the rules," Brook told a media gathering.
"I think it will be a question for [review head Adam Lewis QC] and the review panel to look at whether one or two players made comments about, and they didn't understand the relationship and I think it's one of the things we would expect the review to take a good look at."
William Hill is not implicated in the match-fixing allegations.
Brook says the match-fixing scandal rocking tennis has raised questions about online betting, particularly in-play bets, which certain countries have made illegal.
"I think it's an interesting question. I think there are parts of the world. France is a good example, where in-play betting is illegal," he said.
"There are also ways for the French authorities to lockdown the use of offshore betting through the internet, so they have quite an interesting model, I think, in terms of trying to protect the integrity of sport.
"For sure, this review will be looking at models elsewhere in the world to see how they deal with this issue.
"I think this is what the point of the review is. We'll find out. We are hoping that there will be a list of recommendations to address that issue."
Players believe in integrity of tennis
ATP president Chris Kermode said players already were proactive in reporting suspicious activity.
He said players' reputations were on the line and they were fully supportive of the review.
"All the players I have spoken to during the week - firstly, every player is obliged, any information that they hear, they have to report to the tennis integrity unit, which they do, and everything is investigated that comes from a player," Kermode said.
"All the players that I have spoken to this week are very concerned, some of them are very angry about the story, because they do believe in the integrity of the sport.
"They are taking it quite personally. It's their image and reputation that's on the line, so they are fully supportive of anything we do and actually want this to happen."
Kermode rejected assertions that the sport and its players were perhaps more worried about public perceptions rather than the issue of alleged match-fixing.
"I think [the players] would all agree that we have to take this course of action, because we have to demonstrate, and we are willing to demonstrate, we are transparent and open and they want that as much as we do," he said.
Topics: tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
Social housing: Mike Baird has set the standard for the rest of Australia
Posted
If Mike Baird can introduce a progressive social housing policy in New South Wales, why aren't we seeing this sort of push from the Commonwealth and other state premiers? Catherine Yeomans writes.
New South Wales Premier Mike Baird's social housing policy will see 23,500 new or replacement social and affordable housing dwellings built in Sydney.
The policy, announced at the weekend, was long-awaited and long-demanded by agencies like Mission Australia. And thankfully it's a progressive policy.
It is progressive because the initiatives won't just provide more homes, but will support individuals and communities so that the issues of entrenched disadvantage are tackled.
The policy recognises that many people living with disadvantage - who are in social housing now or on the long waiting list - can progress towards independence with the right supports.
And it acknowledges that some, especially elderly people, can lead fulfilling lives in stable and secure social housing.
It's comprehensive in scope, with more transfers of public housing properties to community housing providers, new Personal Support Plans for social housing tenants (offering "tailored supports and services") and Place Plans to address estates of concentrated disadvantage.
We need the Federal Government to lead and co-ordinate this because every state and territory is facing the same issues as New South Wales.
Although the implementation detail is yet to be seen, we welcome this policy as an indication that at long last we see a Government taking this matter seriously.
It's a positive step, and one I'd urge the Federal Government to take heed of.
If Mike Baird can do it in New South Wales, why aren't we seeing this sort of push from the Commonwealth and other state premiers?
In mid-January, we did see a tentative but tangible step forward from the Commonwealth Government to tackle Australia's housing crisis when Minister for Social Services Christian Porter established a working group to "investigate innovative ways to improve the availability of affordable housing."
But we need more.
We need the Federal Government to lead and co-ordinate this because every state and territory is facing the same issues as New South Wales.
The problem is simple - there isn't enough housing that's affordable for people on low and moderate incomes.
The most recent figures show a shortage of 400,000 affordable homes across Australia.
Mission Australia and other support services see the human effects of this every day, as people ask for help to find somewhere to live.
These people are women and children who have had to flee the family home due to domestic violence, teenagers who can't go back home because of abuse, and elderly women whose landlords have increased rent to a level that just can't be met with their income.
The most recent figures show a shortage of 400,000 affordable homes across Australia.
Sadly, we don't have anywhere near enough resources to help all those people.
In fact, only six per cent of people needing long-term accommodation who seek help from homelessness services actually receive it.
But affordable housing is also a central piece of our national economic infrastructure.
A poorly operating housing market is a drag on productivity. Insecure housing limits individuals' participation in the workforce.
Overly high housing costs restrict people's ability to invest and save for retirement, pushing more onto the age pension and other transfer payments.
Increased homelessness increases the costs to the health and justice systems, so doing nothing is actually more expensive for taxpayers.
Treasurer Scott Morrison has called housing "one of the biggest competition inhibitors". And, as Mike Baird's policy shows, investing in social housing can spark extra construction activity and jobs.
Hopefully, Christian Porter's national working group will move fast.
There is no need for long fact-finding missions. There is incontrovertible evidence of the need and, surprisingly for such a complex area, there is broad consensus among experts on the elements of the solution.
Certainly, it's widely agreed that tax reform is needed. A review of settings around negative gearing, capital gains tax and land tax is necessary to fix market distortions that currently freeze low income families out of housing they can afford.
All players agree that our economy can't grow without affordable homes.
This should help make affordable housing attractive to institutional investors, such as superannuation funds and other finance sources.
A clear commitment from governments, led by the Commonwealth, is needed to provide confidence to investors and to underpin the growing community housing sector.
We are seeing a significant upswing in investor appetite as a result of Mike Baird's $1 billion Social and Affordable Housing Fund, but a national approach is needed to provide the scale at which investment is most effective.
Planning systems must maximise development of below-market housing by requiring, for instance, major residential developments to include a proportion of such housing.
When land value increases through planning changes, part of that value should be captured for the public good.
So that's how we finance and build new homes. But we also need to support the residents in these homes through comprehensive welfare reform.
For example, even with Commonwealth Rent Assistance, 40 per cent of recipients remain in housing stress, and the Youth Allowance is inadequate to cover rent, food and other basic necessities.
Concentrated disadvantage must be tackled through whole-of-community renewal projects, including in legacy public housing estates, not just in New South Wales but around the country.
So, there is clear evidence of the problem and its causes, and a consensus on the key elements of the solution. And examples, such as that shown in New South Wales, of what can be done.
The job for Christian Porter and his working group is to develop the detailed plan at a national scale, especially for unlocking investment potential.
Other processes must also be ensured - processes around tax reform, federation reform, and welfare reform. Use their levers to remove market distortions and incentivise new supply of affordable housing.
All players agree that our economy can't grow without affordable homes, and that we can't fix homelessness without homes, all across Australia.
Let's hope this national working group moves quickly.
Catherine Yeomans is the CEO of Mission Australia.
Topics: social-policy, housing
Mitchell Pearce dog video: Sydney Roosters captain filmed simulating lewd act, NRL future in doubt
Updated
New South Wales State of Origin player and Sydney Roosters captain Mitchell Pearce's immediate playing future is in jeopardy after he was filmed in an apparent alcohol-fuelled incident on Australia Day.
Key points: Mitchell Pearce filmed simulating lewd act with dog
Also tried to kiss girl before being asked to leave
NRL asks Sydney Roosters for report into incident
Grandstand's Andrew Moore "sick to death of drunken bums"
A video showing Pearce engaging in a lewd act involving a dog has aired on the Nine Network.
Pearce, in a seemingly intoxicated state, can be seen in the video forcing an unwanted kiss on a female, who tries to reject his advances.
He then turns his attention to the woman's dog, announcing: "I'll f*** that dog, I don't give a f***, I don't have a sexuality."
The 26-year-old, who was shirtless but wearing shorts, is then seen to simulate sex with the dog.
The woman tells him to stop but Pearce continues to simulate sex before the woman takes the dog away and tells him to leave.
The woman also suggests that Pearce urinated on her couch.
"Get out. Out. Out," she is heard saying.
The NRL has asked the Roosters for a report into the incident after the club advised the league about the matter.
"The [NRL] integrity unit will work with the Roosters to ensure the matter is dealt with appropriately," an NRL statement read.
The Roosters confirmed they would also launch their own investigation.
"The club will conduct an internal investigation and will be making no further comment at this time," a statement read.
Grandstand's Moore 'sick to death of drunken bums'
ABC Grandstand's senior rugby league commentator Andrew Moore said the sport had again been tarnished as a result of the latest incident involving Pearce.
"I've earned my living out of rugby league for many years," he said.
If [this] is what drunken boys do, well, we've got a bigger problem across society than I ever imagined. It's not what people do. Grandstand NRL commentator Andrew Moore
"I'm sick to death of idiotic drunken bums ruining the reputation of this great sport, year in, year out. It is only one or two of them, it doesn't matter.
"It is one or two too many constantly."
Pearce, whose father Wayne is an Australian Rugby League commissioner and a former New South Wales State of Origin captain, has previously been involved in off-field incidents that made headlines.
He was fined $20,000 and stood down from an NRL match in 2014 following his role in an incident involving a female patron in a Kings Cross nightclub.
That incident also cost Pearce his spot in the Blues' line-up for State of Origin I that year.
Moore said Pearce had previously been warned to stay away from alcohol.
"He has had issues with the drink for far too long and won't address it," he said.
"His father is someone I've known for two decades or more, one of the ultimate cleanskins of rugby league and someone who is on the board of the ARL Commission."
Moore said there was no excuse for Pearce's behaviour.
"I've seen it on social media, 'Isn't this what drunken boys do?' Well no, it's not," he said.
"And if it is what drunken boys do, well, we've got a bigger problem across society than I ever imagined.
"It's not what people do."
Should Pearce's contract be terminated by the Roosters, it would not be the first occasion a club has severed ties with a player because of off-field incidents.
Canberra, the Roosters and Cronulla each parted ways with Todd Carney during his NRL career, with the Sharks sacking the playmaker in 2014 after a photo emerged on social media of him appearing to urinate into his mouth.
Joel Monaghan quit the Raiders before he could be sacked after a photo was published on Twitter of the former Australia and New South Wales representative simulating a lewd act with a dog in 2010.
AAP/ABC
Topics: nrl, rugby-league, sport, sydney-2000, nsw, australia
First posted
Pair pleads not guilty after Satudarah bikie crackdown in Sydney
Updated
Two men have pleaded not guilty to charges laid after a police operation targeting the Satudarah bikie gang in Sydney.
Police learnt early last year of attempts by the group, which originated in the Netherlands, to set up chapters in New South Wales.
Gang squad officers charged four alleged Satudarah members earlier this month.
Zachary Shvetsoff, 22, pleaded not guilty to drug possession and supply, and consorting with offenders, after being warned not to.
Police alleged the drug offences involved more than three grams of methamphetamine and occurred in Bankstown last November.
Ashley Biady, aged 29, pleaded not guilty to hindering police.
Shvetsoff's third charge stated that he did "habitually consort with convicted offenders ... Joshua Biady, Ashley Biady and Leif Albertsen ... after having been given official warning".
He is required to report to police daily as part of his bail conditions and is banned from going within 50 metres of an address in Bankstown.
Shvetsoff was also ordered not to associate with or contact the three men who are the subjects of his consorting charge.
Another two men, including the chapter president, will face court next month.
Police said at the time of the arrests they had shut down the group's Sydney chapter based in Bankstown.
The group's international website still lists the Sydney chapter, as well as chapters in northern New South Wales, Brisbane and Adelaide.
Worldwide, the majority of its members are still in the Netherlands, but Satudarah also has a presence in several other European countries, as well as south-east Asia, Canada and Morocco.
Topics: crime, courts-and-trials, sydney-2000, bankstown-2200
First posted
Australian Open: Sara Tomic into girls' quarter-finals
Updated
Sara Tomic has prevailed at the Australian Open where her brother Bernard did not, winning her way into the last eight of the girls' championship at Melbourne Park.
The Queenslander surged through to the quarter-finals in impressive style, fighting back for a 3-6, 7-5, 7-5 third-round victory over Karman Thandi on Wednesday.
The Indian served for the match at 5-4 in the both the second and third sets, but Tomic weathered the storm to prevail.
The match was played almost entirely on Thandi's racquet, with the 17-year-old hitting twice as many winners as the local hope.
But Thandi threw her racquet in disgust when Tomic broke her to lead 4-2 in the deciding set.
The aggressive Indian broke straight back to love, hitting a spree of winners and screeching in delight with each point won.
By contrast, the steely Tomic was almost expressionless on court, save for the occasional fist pump as she worked her way back into the contest to win.
Tomic's run could extend further, having been spared a quarter-final date with the number one seed after her third-round walkover.
Instead, she will play fellow Australian Baijing Lin, ensuring one local will reach the last four of the event.
AAP
Topics: australian-open, tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Man charged with unlawful striking causing death over body in Buddina unit
Posted
A man has been charged over a suspicious death on Queensland's Sunshine Coast.
The body of 33-year-old Scott Williams was found at a Buddina unit on Sunday afternoon.
It is believed he had suffered a severe head injury.
A 39-year-old man who was wanted for questioning over the incident was found by police on Wednesday morning in Maroochydore.
He has been charged with unlawful striking causing death and has been denied bail.
He is due to appear in the Maroochydore Magistrates Court on Thursday.
Topics: law-crime-and-justice, crime, courts-and-trials, assault, buddina-4575, qld
Is Zika virus our next global health crisis?
Posted
The fact that Zika virus has reached Australia is a reminder that infectious disease is one of the major global challenges. The current 'standby, wait, and watch' attitude of the developed world is failing us, writes Peter Curson.
Having survived the human drama of SARS, Avian Flu, Swine Flu, and Ebola - are we now headed for another infectious disease disaster?
The Zika virus, rapidly spreading around the world and now detected in Australians returning from South America, may very well turn out to be our next health crisis.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has now issued a new advice warning to Australians, particularly pregnant women, to reconsider plans to travel to 22 countries affected by the virus.
Zika is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, closely related to dengue to which its symptoms are very similar. Like both the dengue and Chikungunya viruses, the disease is transmitted by aedes mosquitoes and results in rashes, fever, headaches and severe joint pain.
In the case of Zika only one in five of those infected will go on to develop symptoms but there is a possibility that the infection can produce microcephaly (abnormal smallness of the head) in newly born infants.
While the evidence is still not conclusive there is little doubt that the number of young children born with microcephaly has substantially increased in countries such as Brazil where over the last year Zika has spread widely.
Zika is named after a forest in Uganda where the disease was first isolated in a rhesus monkey in 1947. It was first found in humans in Nigeria in 1954.
Looking back on the last 15 years, have we learnt anything about the identification and control of infectious disease outbreaks? I very much doubt it.
Before 2013 only a handful of Zika cases had been recorded but during 2015 the disease spread rapidly, producing a number of significant outbreaks in the Pacific Islands, South America and South East Asia. Recently the infection has also been recorded in Puerto Rico, and cases are now beginning to appear in the USA and UK among travellers returning from Latin America.
The large-scale outbreak in Brazil, that seems to have commenced in 2015, has virologists linking the infection to the birth defect microcephaly for the first time. In parts of Latin America women are now being advised to postpone becoming pregnant for at least six months.
Like many infections, the disease accompanies international travellers around our world, particularly those who had spent time in Latin America or the Pacific Islands. This, allied to the fact that the aedes mosquitoes responsible for spreading dengue throughout the world are also widespread in parts of Australia, places us at risk. Also, like dengue, there is no cure for Zika and treatment simply focuses on relieving the symptoms.
It is still unclear as to why Zika, which until recently was relatively rare, seems to be spreading so quickly. Many believe that human mobility and intrusion into infected areas plays a critical role but some argue that increasing temperatures, changing the breeding pattern and distribution of mosquito populations, may also be to blame.
There is little doubt that we are living in a highly mobile world where millions of people move every day across international borders in pursuit of holidays, education and business - or fleeing from natural disasters or civil unrest.
In addition, more people are seeking to visit remote rural locations in Latin America and the Pacific, possibly exposing them to encounters with infected mosquitoes. It would also seem true that both increasing temperatures and a higher frequency of tropical downpours may well influence the number and distribution of aedes mosquitoes.
We tend to be governed by the rubric: 'If it kills us, then we do something about it. Whereas, if it just debilitates and incapacitates, we tend to live with it'.
But are we witnessing the early stages of a 'pandemic in progress'? If an epidemic of Zika was to break out in Australia, would it produce the same reaction and fear that we saw with SARS and Avian and Swine Flu?
Possibly not given that we have been living with dengue for well over 100 years. But on the other hand, the possible implications for mothers giving birth would most certainly engender considerable fear and apprehension.
There is little doubt that infectious disease is one of the major challenges facing our world today. Looking back on the last 15 years, have we learnt anything about the identification and control of infectious disease outbreaks? I very much doubt it.
Given our experience with dengue and other mosquito-borne infections we tend to be governed by the rubric: 'If it kills us, then we do something about it. Whereas, if it just debilitates and incapacitates, we tend to live with it'.
If this was untrue we would have had a cure or vaccine for dengue decades ago. Presumably the same might apply to Zika. The ebola outbreak in West Africa also indicated how poorly we react and respond to epidemic crises. The 'standby, wait, and watch' attitude of the developed world seems to be based on a belief that epidemics in underdeveloped countries will eventually burn themselves out and that unless they directly threaten North America or Europe we do not need to react and respond.
We still do not have an international response and reaction agency charged with quickly identifying and responding to epidemics wherever they might occur in the world. With respect to infectious disease there is still much we have to do to ensure a safe and secure world.
Peter Curson is Emeritus Professor of Population and Health at Macquarie University and Honorary Professor of Population and Security at Sydney University.
Topics: infectious-diseases-other, travel-health-and-safety
EJ Whitten Bridge crash: Two dead after 'drag-racing' ute careers into gully, bursts into flames in Melbourne
Updated
Two people who died when their ute plunged off a bridge in Keilor East, in Melbourne's north-west, may have been drag racing.
Key points: Police believe cars racing at speeds of 160 kph before crash
Driver of silver sedan called to come forward
Traffic delayed after outbound lanes on Western Ring Road closed
Crash happened after illegal street party in Campbellfield
Police said two cars were speeding along the Western Ring Road at 1:30am when the driver of one of the vehicles lost control and drove off the side of the EJ Whitten Bridge, which is 55 metres at its highest point.
The ute, which police estimate was travelling at 160 kilometres per hour (kph), crashed into a one-metre-high barrier before landing in a deep gully and bursting into flames.
A witness told Macquarie Radio a fireball was sent up into the air when the car crashed.
"I was driving to work at 1:30am and I was doing 100 kph and these two cars came flying past me and gave me a fright," he said.
"It would have been 100 or 200 metres in front of me. I saw one of the cars lose control and go over the railing.
"It burst into flames, it was surreal. It was like watching a movie."
The crash caused heavy traffic delays for morning commuters with the southbound lanes of the Western Ring Road closed while police investigated.
One lane remains closed.
Inspector Bernie Rankin said the second vehicle, a 2003-2004 silver Ford sedan with a green P-plate, had earlier been seen at an illegal street party attended by hundreds of youths in Campbellfield.
He said the driver of the sedan was later seen baiting other vehicles to race before the crash.
"This vehicle was seen encouraging other vehicles to get involved in a drag race," Inspector Rankin said.
"This vehicle was seen entering the Western Ring Road, entering from Sydney Road, then it travelled south and at some stage has got into a drag race with the vehicle where our two deceased people have been located.
"This is a classic case of testosterone, adrenalin, young fellows and fast cars. It's just a dreadful mix and we've had very, very serious consequences."
He said police were investigating why the ute driver had lost control.
"We're still checking, maybe there was contact between the vehicles, maybe there wasn't, we're still looking at all of those parts of the collision scene to work out precisely what's happened," Inspector Rankin said.
Police have urged the person driving the silver sedan to come forward.
Meanwhile, a backseat passenger was killed when the car she was travelling in crashed into trees at Buangor in Victoria's west on Tuesday night.
Police said the driver lost control after hitting a fox on the Western Highway at 10:30pm near Ararat.
The woman died at the scene and three others were injured in the crash.
Topics: police, keilor-east-3033, ararat-3377
First posted
Tennis match-fixing scandal: Lleyton Hewitt allegations very damaging, says ATP president
Updated
The ATP's president says claims linking retired Australian tennis star Lleyton Hewitt to the sport's match-fixing scandal are "deeply unfair" and damaging to him and fellow players.
Tennis's governing bodies on Wednesday announced an independent review into their anti-corruption unit following recent allegations of failing to pursue evidence of alleged match-fixing.
But in the wake of the BBC-Buzzfeed report that claimed authorities failed to thoroughly pursue evidence of alleged corruption in the sport, a blog post linked Hewitt's name with the match-fixing allegations.
Hewitt slammed the online post as "an absolute farce", and ATP president Chris Kermode says those allegations have been damaging to Hewitt and other top players.
But Kermode says the links to irregular betting patterns cannot stand on their own, and any allegations against players need to be proven.
"Again, I don't want to get into undermining anyone's journalism or how this investigative report came out, I think clearly that speaks volumes," Kermode told a news gathering.
Lleyton Hewitt, as we all know, is one of the greatest competitors of all time. I'm not sure he'd give his mother one point when he was playing. ATP president Chris Kermode
"Lleyton Hewitt, as we all know, is one of the greatest competitors of all time. I'm not sure he'd give his mother one point when he was playing.
"However, that can't just stand alone. Again, we have heard examples of other great [players], where everyone has refuted that there have been any wrongdoings, but we need to go out and prove it.
"What I don't like is that names are attached based on absolutely no evidence whatsoever. I think it's deeply unfair. I think it's deeply damaging to the players."
Kyrgios answering phone on court not a good look
Meanwhile, Nick Kyrgios may have avoided punishment for bizarrely answering his phone on court just prior to his doubles match with Ajla Tomljanovic, but officials say these kinds of incidents will be scrutinised in the review into tennis's anti-corruption unit.
Kyrgios, 20, escaped sanction for answering his phone on court before Saturday afternoon's mixed doubles match at the Australian Open.
The world number 30 took a phone call from friends before his match alongside girlfriend Tomljanovic, forcing officials to investigate the incident overnight.
Players are prohibited from using their phones during matches, but Kyrgios avoided punishment as he answered the call before the pre-match meeting.
Tennis officials conceded it was not a good look.
"I suppose it's the look of it. We are investigating all of this stuff about match-fixing," Brook said.
ATP president Kermode said these kinds of incidents would be analysed by the independent review.
"I'm not sure if that is really a tennis integrity question or not. I'm sure that it will be looked into in due course," he said.
"I think that's a perfect example of things that will come out of this review."
Topics: tennis, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Bridget, 4, was lucky enough to move into her new home with owner Patricia Williams a week before Christmas. (27 January 2016)
Posted
Bridget, 4, was lucky enough to move into her new home with owner Patricia Williams a week before Christmas. (27 January 2016)
Topics: human-interest, animals, canberra-2600, act
WA Supreme Court orders probe into Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation
Updated
The governance of an Indigenous body in Western Australia's Pilbara will be investigated by the Supreme Court after allegations its directors have not been validly appointed.
The issue is the latest in a long-running dispute between the Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation (YAC) and a breakaway body, the Wirlu Murra Indigenous Corporation (WMYAC).
The rift between both parties relates back to negotiations over royalty payments from the Fortescue Metals Group-owned Solomon iron ore project.
In 2010 the Wirlu Murrah group split from the YAC after it became disenfranchised with the manner in which the corporation was operating, adopting the mantra "jobs not handouts".
After an annual general meeting in November last year, the YAC failed to deliver the 75 per cent majority required to elect new board members, resulting in the incumbents continuing in their positions.
Subsequently, chairman of the Wirlu Murrah group John Sandy launched legal action against the YAC, challenging the validity of the current directors.
The issue in question relates to a section of the Corporation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act (CATSI) which regulates the conduct of these groups.
Justice Michael Corboy ordered the allegations put forward by John Sandy be heard in the Supreme Court.
Mr Sandy said he was pleased the issue would now be examined by the courts.
"Based on the Wirlu-Murra's perspective, we'd like everyone to get all benefits from the Yindjibarndi and just move on," he said.
"We'd like the court to look at their governance."
Yindjibarndi Corporation chief executive Michael Woodley also welcomed an investigation into the validity of the director's positions.
"What we want to do is to continue to operate in the best possible manner on behalf of the corporation and its members, and we don't want anything hanging over our heads," he said.
"We think the only way we can do that is through a Supreme Court action.".
The hearing is scheduled to commence in the Western Australian Supreme Court on February 22.
Topics: aboriginal, courts-and-trials, port-hedland-6721, newman-6753
First posted
Tunarama festival wraps up for another year in Port Lincoln
Posted
Flying tuna, rolling kegs and plenty of seafood greeted crowds at the Tunarama Festival in Port Lincoln over the Australia Day long weekend.
The annual event celebrated its 55th year of showcasing arts, culture and entertainment from the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia.
Plenty of local music and entertainment acts took to the Tunarama main stage during the five days of the festival, which finished on the Australia Day public holiday.
The festival was given a colourful boost on Saturday with a street procession through Port Lincoln featuring dancers, musicians and plenty of costumed characters.
There were plenty of events for the public to get involved in, with everything from keg rolling to tuna tossing to prawn peeling competitions.
Julie King, who drove from Adelaide for the second year in a row for the festival, said the slippery pole competition was a highlight.
"It's some youn guns going along a pole trying to slide along and hang on without falling off. It was quite comical actually," she said.
"It looked very hard, but it was good. It's just something different."
The event with one of the biggest crowds was the annual Tuna Toss competition, where competitors throw frozen tuna towards the ocean from the Port Lincoln foreshore.
Michael Proude, who defeated his son Levi by just 3cm to take home the men's division title, said the crowds had grown since he first got involved with the event in the 1980s.
"There's a lot of excitement. People come to see the big throws," he said.
City of Port Lincoln Mayor Bruce Green described the boat building competition on Sunday as his personal favourite event.
This year the event had its biggest field yet, with 24 teams entering the race.
Teams of two people built boats from plywood and basic materials, then tested their seaworthiness by racing them around a buoy placed near the end of the Port Lincoln jetty.
The mad scramble towards the finish line, with many of the boats brought from the water in several pieces, was probably best described by event MC Ian "Beebs" Beeby: "The only rule is there are no rules."
Topics: regional, community-and-multicultural-festivals, port-lincoln-5606
Sarnya, Roman and Ms Raines use the audiometer
Posted
Sarnya Clarke helps clinical nurse Christine Raines check Roman's hearing during the clinic. Using an audiometer, Ms Raines checks his hearing by asking him to clap when he hears a beeping noise.
Topics: adolescent-health, child-health-and-behaviour, mackay-4740
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Man accused of giving daughter painkiller Oxycontin initially failed to disclose drug ingested, court told
Updated
A Gold Coast man who allegedly gave his two-month-old daughter the prescription painkiller Oxycontin has been granted bail.
The 22-year-old, who cannot be identified, allegedly administered the drug when the girl would not settle on January 10.
The baby was treated at the Gold Coast University Hospital and later released.
Queensland Police charged the father with administering poison with intent to harm and possessing a controlled substance.
At Southport Magistrates Court today, Magistrate Dermott Keogh asked the man's lawyer Paul Byrne how the accused came to be in possession of the prescription drug.
"The Oxycontin, I believe, had been used by the mother of the child for an injury that she had sustained," Mr Byrne said.
Police prosecutor Senior Constable Donna Minns told the court the father delayed the medical treatment provided to his daughter by initially failing to disclose to doctors what drug the baby had ingested.
The court heard the father only passed on the information after he returned home from the hospital and did an internet search of the drug's side effects.

He then allegedly sent a text to his wife and asked her to tell doctors to "pump her stomach".
"There is a certain amount of neglect on his part," the police prosecutor said.
The magistrate granted the man bail on the condition that he only have contact with the child while in the presence of a child safety officer and that he report to police twice a week.
The case was adjourned until February 25 for a committal call over.
Topics: courts-and-trials, law-crime-and-justice, southport-4215, qld, australia
First posted
Boundary Street signs changed to 'Boundless' in Brisbane's West End in anonymous nod to dark past
Posted
Street signs in Brisbane's West End have been changed from Boundary to "Boundless" Street anonymously as a nod to the area's past.
Photos of the changed signs began appearing on social media in the lead-up to Australia Day.
So far, no-one has owned up to placing the stickers over the original street signs.
West End elder Sam Watson said the name Boundary Street served as a reminder of a racist colonial regime that once existed in Brisbane.
You shouldn't sanitise history or conceal history as it should be there for people to know about. Elder Sam Watson
"The signs go back to 1829, and through the 1940s they were seen as exclusion zones to keep Aboriginal people separated from the European arrivals," he told 612 ABC Brisbane's Spencer Howson.
"Mounted police would use bull whips to move blacks out of the area.
"Places such as Musgrave Park and the Woolloongabba cricket ground were places where the mounted police would drive Aboriginal people to keep them away from the white exclusion zone."
Mr Watson's family are traditional owners of the West End area and he said they were unsure who had been changing the signs.
"I've heard a lot of talk about it and I had supper down there yesterday and someone has put a big Aboriginal sign at Boundary and Vulture Street," he said.
"We don't know who's doing it but it's interesting.
"I think people need to be aware of the history, but I personally would not support a changing of the name.
"You shouldn't sanitise history or conceal history as it should be there for people to know about.
"I would like signage through the area to let people coming into the area know they are walking on country with that darker history."
Mr Watson said the history of Boundary Street was not well-known to the general public.
"Our people were well aware of the history and because of our traditions our grandparents and aunties and uncles told us the stories," he said.
"As a youngster my uncles would take me walking around that area and up to Spring Hill, where the main road used to be, and then down to Petrie as that was the exclusion zone.
"Aboriginal people would be treated quite brutally if they crossed that demarcation line, if they crossed it after the hours of darkness."
Topics: history, community-and-society, indigenous-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander, human-interest, west-end-4101
Claremont serial killings haunt locals 20 years on
Posted
Twenty years on, the disappearance of 18-year-old Sarah Spiers in Perth continues to haunt residents and police say they remain on the case.
Ms Spiers was the first of three women snatched over an 18-month period, crimes that would become known as the Claremont serial killings.
While the bodies of Jane Rimmer and Ciara Glennon were eventually found dumped in bushland, Ms Spiers' body was never recovered by police.
No-one has ever been prosecuted for the killings and they have become one of the most expensive murder investigations in Australian history.
Ms Spiers' parents, Don and Carol, said time had not healed their loss.
I want to be the police commissioner who is remembered for solving the investigation. Karl O'Callaghan, WA Police Commissioner
"Words are inadequate to describe our personal loss and heartbreak," they said in a statement.
"We retain confidence in the Macro Investigation Team to solve this case."
That team of dedicated detectives has continued to investigate the case to this day.
WA Police Commissioner Karl O'Callaghan said there was still a lot of work being done by police.
"I want to be the police commissioner who is remembered for solving the investigation," he said.
"So you can rest assured that I've put the right sort of resources in there and the right focus on it."
Past police errors criticised
Bret Christian, editor of the local Post newspaper, said he thought the unsolved murders had caused massive problems for WA police, as well as leaving a suburb deeply traumatised.
"It continues to haunt them," he said.
One resident who works in the area said her mother hated her driving around anytime after 7:00pm.
"And I always [have] in the back of my mind as well, just to be extra cautious in Claremont," she said.
Another resident said people were more aware of the dangers and it had probably changed the way people behaved.
"You didn't want to go out, and your children, you're worried about them," the resident said.
Christian has been following the case since the beginning and said he was more confident now than he had ever been before about the possibility of the case being solved.
"But that doesn't say it's going to happen," Mr Christian said.
The Post last year revealed a new team of investigators possibly had a lead, however police remained silent as efforts to solve the murders continued.
In the past, officers have been criticised for their handling of the case, particularly a fixation on several men who were eventually cleared of involvement.
Christian said there had been "some glaring errors made when you look at it in retrospect".
"It was the focus on the wrong person, and massive resources went into a particular public servant who lived near Claremont that many police were convinced was the culprit, and has turned out now not to be the culprit, proved by DNA," he said.
Topics: murder-and-manslaughter, crime, claremont-6010
Rob Pyne: Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk 'happy' to call Cairns MP over future
Updated
Queensland's Premier has dismissed suggestions she should have called Cairns MP Rob Pyne amid suggestions he may quit the Labor Party, but said she was happy to discuss any issues he had.
Mr Pyne made conflicting remarks this week over whether he intended to remain a member of the minority Government.
It followed him quitting the party's left faction as it was "left in name only".
Mr Pyne also raised concerns over the impact Labor's proposed nightclub lockout laws would have on his electorate, arguing Cairns should be exempt.
But he said he would not break party rules.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said any member of her team was free to raise concerns with her.
"Any issues that anyone has they're free to pick up the phone and talk to me, they're free to raise issues in the Labor caucus," Ms Palaszcuzk said.
The Premier said Mr Pyne had not called her to discuss the matters.
Asked why she had not called him, Ms Palaszcuzk pointed to Mr Pyne's comments to ABC that he did not intend to quit.
"He's said it publicly, he's said it on numerous occasions, so I'm sorry, I don't understand what the problem is," Ms Palaszczuk said.
But Ms Palaszczuk said she was happy to call Mr Pyne this afternoon.
Treasurer Curtis Pitt said he would also speak with the MP, whose electorate neighbours his.
"I've got faith that he was elected as a Labor MP and I know that his values are Labor values, so I think we have a situation where the air needs to be cleared," Mr Pitt said.
Mr Pyne declined to comment on the matter.
Topics: government-and-politics, state-parliament, qld, cairns-4870
First posted
Bush-loving tourists attracted to new live-in nature reserve in central Queensland
Posted
A new conservation program inviting couples to sign up for a month-long, live-in stay at a central Queensland nature reserve is proving to be incredibly popular with both tourists and everyday Australians.
Not-for-profit conservation organisation Bush Heritage Australia manages more than 35 reserves around the country, protecting more than 6 million hectares of natural environment.
It has taken a new approach to the conservation work at a property in the heart of central Queensland — Goonderoo Reserve, about 340 kilometres west of the coast.
Volunteer coordinator Leanne Hales said the group was looking for couples with practical skills, and a love of the bush, to live on the property.
"Up until this point we've only been able to staff the reserve sporadically," she said.
"We've just got the point where that's not enough. We want a permanent presence."
Goonderoo Reserve is home to bandicoots, sugar gliders, koalas, emus and also hosts a habitat for the nationally endangered Bridled Nailtail Wallaby.
It is also scattered with a native wattle, Brigalow, which has largely disappeared due to large-scale land clearing.
"It's in a part of the world that's been fairly altered for agricultural purposes and grazing, so it's an important remnant in a pretty fragmented landscape," Mrs Hales said.
Mrs Hales said the new program was a great experience for volunteers and had a huge response already.
"It is the perfect way to experience the bush, to experience Bush Heritage, to enjoy some time outdoors in a great environment, but also to get the satisfaction and that positive kick that you've really helped a good cause," she said.
"We've filled it for the rest of the year without even trying so that was really exciting."
While Ms Hales said the main criteria for the role was enthusiasm, most of their volunteers also share a love of exploring the outback.
"They love experiencing new country, but it's just not quite enough to do that as a tourist," she said.
"They want to feel like that in some way they've helped and they've assisted with the conservation and they've done their little bit."
Conservation tourism boon for volunteering
Bush Heritage's Leanne Hales said live-in caretaking was an increasing trend for conservation volunteers across Australia.
"They get to get their hands dirty and have a first-hand experience," she said.
We're harnessing the enthusiasm of everyday Australians. Leanne Hales, Bush Heritage
"For us, it creates a deeper connection between the general public and the work that we do."
Mrs Hales said a lot of their other properties across the country had similar caretaking opportunities open to the public.
"We're harnessing the enthusiasm of everyday Australians," she said.
"It's not necessarily a scientist or a professional land manager, it's people that just love the bush.
"If we can harness that and keep moving in that direction then we're on to a winner."
A conservation couple
Tom Sjolund, 63, and Alison Smyth, 66, live in Kinka Beach on the Capricorn Coast.
Alison used to be a florist in Rockhampton and Tom worked in video surveillance.
They have been together for 20 years and are Goonderoo's first live-in volunteers.
They described themselves as "sort of retired" and said they shared a love of nature and conservation.
"So much of Australia has been developed and the environment is in such a fragmented system," said Tom.
"What we're trying to do is bring corridors of life back — that's what I'm really keen to help out with".
"I just love nature, I just like being a bit useful wherever I can," said Alison.
Inspired by a story about a conservation group using mobile phones to record and monitor bird species, Tom also came up with a unique project while at Goonderoo.
"Having been in video surveillance and being an avid bird watcher, I thought maybe we can use the cameras in the mobile phones," he said.
Using a smart phone application, Tom has begun setting up cameras around the reserve that can live-stream back to his laptop at the homestead.
"It would be for letting people know about Goonderoo," said Tom.
"Instead of seeing just a still picture, people can actually see what's happening around the place."
Topics: conservation, environment, brigalow-4412, qld, australia
Australia Day honours: Tony Harrison from Albany recognised for services to surfing and the sea
Posted
A keen surfer and ocean lover, Albany's Tony Harrison, has been named the Western Australian Premier's Active Award winner as part of Australia Day celebrations.
Mr Harrison is also the driving force behind one of the region's most popular senior citizens groups, Granny Grommets.
You hear them laughing and encouraging each other and it takes me back to that enthusiasm I had for surfing when I started. You can't help but feel good. Granny Grommets founder and winner of the WA Premier's Active Award, Tony Harrison
Formed in 1999, the group meets each Friday at Albany's Middleton Beach and is comprised of up to 35 female participants who ride boogie boards under the watchful, and skilled, eye of Mr Harrison.
"The Granny Grommets initially got together as a way of promoting women's health and keeping active," Mr Harrison said.
"I had started coaching surfers two years prior, so I was approached to help out.
"At that stage there were about six or eight ladies involved, but now I think we are up to about 35 and the oldest is 82 years old."
It was one of those "Grommets" who nominated Mr Harrison for the award and he said he got as much inspiration from the participants as they got from him.
"Especially on those days when the weather and surf is crap," Mr Harrison said.
"You hear them laughing and encouraging each other and it takes me back to that enthusiasm I had for surfing when I started. You can't help but feel good."
Mr Harrison's continued involvement with all things aquatic also drew praise from the City of Albany.
A spokesperson said Mr Harrison was also recognised for his involvement in local environmental and advisory groups.
"Tony's passion for protecting our oceans and environment is well known to City of Albany staff as he is not shy about sharing his knowledge and passion for the sea," the spokesperson said.
"He has also been a mentor to younger generations through his surf academy business and has also supported new marine-based businesses, which recently started in Albany."
For Mr Harrison himself, the award is secondary to his continued love for the ocean.
"I've always been involved with the ocean; either in it, on it, or under it," he said.
"It's up to all of us to look after it because it is in a bit of strife."
Topics: surfing, environment, womens-health, albany-6330
Car crashes into house at Lalor Park in Sydney's west
Updated
A man has been taken to hospital after he crashed his car into a house in Sydney's west.
Police said no-one was in the house, at Lalor Park, when the car smashed into it about 1:00am.
The 19-year-old driver was taken to Westmead Hospital in a serious condition.
"Emergency services were called to Hathaway Road at Lalor Park following reports a silver sedan had crashed into a house," a police statement said.
It said the driver was "trapped in the vehicle for a short time before he was taken by NSW ambulance paramedics to Westmead Hospital".
"No-one was in the house at the time of the incident, but the house suffered serious structural damage from the crash," the statement said.
"A crime scene has been established and police from Quakers Hill Local Area Command are investigating the incident."
Authorities said there were also concerns the home contained asbestos which would make the task of removing the car more difficult.
Topics: road, lalor-park-2147, sydney-2000
First posted
Canberra pets find their forever home as adoption rates rise
Posted
The RSPCA ACT has had a busier than usual Christmas season with many animals being adopted.
But it said it was still struggling to re-home many of its older dogs.
The RSPCA facility at Weston received 128 animals between December 21 and January 3, including 23 dogs and 84 cats.
It re-homed 163 animals - 40 more than the same time the previous year.
But RSPCA ACT director of animal welfare Jane Gregor said adult dogs often proved the biggest challenge when it came to finding a new home.
"People love those cute, cuddly kittens and it means sometimes those adult animals are forgotten about," Ms Gregor said.
"We certainly have a lot of long-term dogs here at the moment which we would love to see get out into homes."
Bailey, an 11-month-old hound cross who came into care with horrific oil burns to his back, has been at the centre for more than 200 days.
But he still has not found a new home.
"We did have a 50 per cent off special over Christmas which did see a lot of dogs go home," Ms Gregor said.
"But unfortunately a lot of these long-termers are here because they're special and they need someone who knows a little bit about dog behaviour to take these guys on."
Bridget finds her forever home
One lucky pup that did find a new family over the holidays was four-year-old Rhodesian ridgeback cross Bridget.
Bridget's old owners surrendered her last year due to family circumstances.
But she was adopted by Flynn resident Patricia Williams a week before Christmas.
Ms Williams said Bridget had settled into her new home very quickly.
"Within less than a week I could walk her on the off-leash area without a leash and she would come back to me," she said.
"The first week or two she was reluctant to play and I thought, 'Oh well, she's an adult dog'.
"But as she settled in well she's more willing to play."
Animal health programs behind adoption boost
RSPCA ACT chief executive Tammy Ven Dange said the rise in adoption numbers was due to an improvement in animal health at the Weston centre.
"When we're at capacity or over capacity, it's really hard to keep the animals from spreading disease or flu or other things to each other," Ms Ven Dange said.
"This year we've done a really good job with our programs of keeping them healthy and as a result we've been able to adopt out more animals."
Ms Ven Dange said they had also offered discounted de-sexing for those on a pension late last year to help prevent unwanted animals.
"There's a bit of a Christmas myth that people will get a pet that they don't want and then turn them in to us," she said.
"It's really not true.
"I think last year we had one animal and I'm not aware of any animals that came in as gifts and then were returned.
"What we find more of are a lot of animals that are unwanted because they were born unwanted and we have over 100 kittens in foster care right now because of that."
Topics: animals, human-interest, canberra-2600, act
Adrian Koenen on his property in Wooliana on the Daly River
Posted
Adrian Koenen gestures to where flood waters came up to on his property in Wooliana during the 2015-16 Daly River region floods.
Topics: fishing-aquaculture, floods, daly-river-0822
Tasmanian fires: Buildings damaged in state's north-west as strong winds fan flames
Updated
Several houses and shacks have been damaged or destroyed by a large bushfire in Tasmania's north-west as the state's fire chief says it has been one of the worst fire seasons he has seen.
Key points: Out-of-control fire threatening communities in Tasmania's far north-west
TFS confirms several buildings and shacks damaged
People evacuated from Arthur River, Couta Rocks and Temma
Some residents were evacuated as emergency warnings were declared for Temma, Arthur River and Nelson Bay on Wednesday.
Residents at Arthur River had to leave their homes while some in Nelson Bay took refuge at the beach.
An emergency warning remains current for Temma but warnings have been downgraded to watch and act in Nelson Bay and Arthur River.
Farmers in the area have been forced to move cattle to save them from the blaze.
Farm manager Graham Pretty said the property he works on near Temma had suffered millions of dollars worth of damage.
But Mr Pretty said his property had lost pasture and fencing along with a 4,000-hectare plantation which was soon to be harvested.
But he said he had moved his cattle to vegetation areas with fire breaks around them and he was confident they would survive.
"The firefighters have done a fantastic job keeping it at bay up until now," he said.
"If the big fella up top sends us a bit of rain hopefully we'll get through all this and in the next 10 days it will be a distant memory."
Chief fire officer Gavin Freeman said the fire was being fanned by strong winds
"It looks like we may not have lost any shacks so its just outbuildings and veranda's at this point but that could change," he said.
"We can confirm around 72,000 hectares has been burnt and that gives us around 650 kilometres of fire perimeter that we need to manage."
Chief officer Freeman said the fire was very difficult to fight.
"Erratic conditions, erratic fire behaviour, and very dry conditions so we can't rely on what it's going to do, it's unpredictable," he said.
"We're focusing on trying to slow it down and steer it away from natural resources and infrastructure.
"Realistically we won't get these fires extinguished by next week."
There have been no reports of any injuries but a 70-year-old man has been treated for smoke inhalation.
Police have urged people to reconsider plans to visit fire-affected areas.
Assistant Commissioner Rob Bonde said the fires were unpredictable and travelling near them could be dangerous.
"On a personal level if it was me I would be seriously considering the risk of staying there as opposed to the safety of relocating."
Firefighters among people evacuated to beach
David Hardy, who owns a property in Arthur River said six firefighters were also evacuated to the beach.
"They're saying conditions are just too extreme to attempt to even fight it," he said.
"They had to take refuge with us. Apart from being able to breathe, the visibility is just zero.
"It's absolute hell, you can't see 10 feet.
"When you can it's just an eerie pool of evil-looking smoke.
"The firefighters, there's six of them here because one of the bridges has burnt out and they can't get reinforcements in."
The Tasmanian Fire Service (TFS) dispatched more tankers and three water bombers to boost crews on the ground.
Couta Rocks lobster fisher Graham Airey said he would use his boat to evacuate people from the area if needed.
"I've got a big fishing boat here and if it got to that stage I'd put everybody on the boat and head to sea," he said.
The fire began on Wuthering Heights Road, and has burnt through about 7,000 hectares, including Forestry Tasmania land.
A watch and act alert is also current for Mawbanna, west of Burnie.
Overland Track closed until next month
The Parks and Wildlife Service (PWS) has announced parts of Cradle Mountain and the Overland Track have been closed as a result of bushfires burning in the area.
PWS general manager Peter Mooney said the area would remain closed until February 2.
"While there is no immediate threat to walkers, we have increased the level of alert and believe the most prudent course of action is to not allow walkers to be put in harm's way," he said.
"We are also implementing strategies to ensure that the safety of walkers currently on the track is not compromised."
Mr Mooney said an estimated 11,380 hectares of Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area had been burnt by more than 80 fires reported around the state.
"While life and property is always the priority of the co-operative firefighting effort, the Tasmanian Fire Service has been working closely with our agency to prioritise protection of high value areas within the reserve system as well," he said.
Topics: bushfire, arthur-river-7330
First posted
Snail detecting app developed for broad acre crops
Posted
A smartphone app has been developed that detects snails in broad acre crops by the Department of Agriculture and Food Western Australia (DAFWA).
The smartphone is clamped to the wheel of a header and as a crop is being harvested, and the app takes a photo of the ground every six metres.
The series of photographs are then collated and a detailed contour map displaying problem areas can be produced.
Senior research officer at DAFWA in Albany John Moore helped to develop the app and he said as snails became more prevalent in grain crops, this app aimed to help farmers target specific snail populations.
"Ten years ago it would've been rare that you found snails in grain, whereas last year there were certainly lots of trucks that were turned around because of snails," Mr Moore said.
Given the recent increase in snail infestations, Mr Moore said a lot of farmers were unaware of problem areas in their crops.
"Snails tend to appear in patches and at the moment a lot of farmers are only just starting to get snails," he said.
"So a lot of farmers have snails and they don't even realise they have snails because there's only a small patch.
"If we can just go and control those patches with baits and we don't have to spray the paddock it makes it very profitable," Mr Moore said.
Mr Moore said the app was still in its development stage, however, any growers interested in using the app should get in contact with DAFWA's Albany office.
Topics: pest-management, computers-and-technology, agricultural-crops, crop-harvesting, albany-6330
Health checks a priority for children before school, says clinical health nurse
Posted
A clinical health nurse is encouraging parents to get their child's health checked before Prep, saying it could help make parenting easier.
Christine Raines is a clinical nurse at the Child Youth and Family Health in Mackay, and her role involves conducting health checks on four-year-olds to make sure they are reaching appropriate developmental milestones before school.

"Basically we are aiming for them to be ready to go to school and to communicate with teachers and other kids without the support of their parents," Ms Raines said.

She said the health check was conducted in a play-based environment, and involved accessing the child's eyesight, hearing, physical development and basic language skills.
"We're aiming to access to make sure they're appropriately developed in all areas across the board, and if they're not we aim to link them in with appropriate therapy," she said.

Ms Raines said it was quite common for four-year-olds to be falling down in one area or another in regards to speech or hearing.

"Obviously these things need to be assessed further to see whether it's a prolonged deficit or whether it's just on the day ... but we need to investigate further and see whether it's something that's going to affect their learning, their schooling and their development."

Health checks getting 'prioritised down the bottom'

Ms Raines said the clinic had been trying to publicise the health checks because parents could forget to prioritise them.

"People have busy lives. It's really hard to think, 'Okay, I need to remember to get my four-year-old in for a health check' when you have a lot of other things going on in your life," she said.

"Health checks for children, not just four-year-olds, from babies upwards tend to be getting missed because mums, dads and carers have different things going on in their lives and it gets prioritised down the bottom."

She said the health checks not only made a big difference to the child's life, but also the parents'.

"It will also make parenting easier, because when you say to your small person 'please come over here' ... it's not because they're being difficult, it's because they don't hear," she said.

"So it's going to make things easier for mum, dad or a carer if they can hear, see and do all the things we would expect them to do."
Ms Raines said the comprehensive health checks were free, and invited parents to get in touch and make an appointment.
Topics: adolescent-health, child-health-and-behaviour, mackay-4740
Graham 'The Munster' Kinniburgh death: Terrence Blewitt fired fatal shot at Melbourne underworld figure, court told
Updated
Underworld figure Terrence Blewitt fired the fatal shot in the murder of high-profile gangland player, Graham 'The Munster' Kinniburgh, a court has been told.
Stephen John Asling, 55, has been charged with Kinniburgh's murder, who was shot outside his Kew home in December, 2003.
Asling also faced a charge of stealing and setting fire to a car when he appeared via videolink at Melbourne Magistrates Court.
While Asling has been accused of the murder, the court was told Blewitt fired the gun that killed Kinniburgh.
Police believe they unearthed Blewitt's remains in an empty block in Thomastown last week, more than a decade after he was last seen.
The remains have not yet been officially identified.
"It's my understanding Blewitt was the one who fired the fatal shot but there is another weapon," magistrate Charles Rozencwajg said.
"There's certainly a case for two firearms."
The charges against Asling came after a long-running investigation by the Purana Taskforce, which focuses on underworld activity.
Dozens of witnesses are expected to give evidence during Asling's case, which has been set down for five days in July.
Topics: crime, courts-and-trials, murder-and-manslaughter, melbourne-3000, vic
First posted
Perth awarded Australia-New Zealand rugby league Test match
Posted
Perth will host its first rugby league international after a clash between Australian and New Zealand was announced for Perth Oval on October 15.
The match will be a lead-up to the 2016 Four Nations Tournament in the UK.
The appointment follows several NRL matches played in Perth in recent years with Souths-Gold Coast and Manly-New Zealand Warriors matches also scheduled for 2016.
NRL Head of Football, Todd Greenberg, said healthy Perth crowds warranted taking an international fixture to the west.
"It is clear that Perth has embraced our club games in recent years and we will see another two important premiership matches in the city this year," Greenberg said.
"The support that the game has received is a key reason we have decided to stage a Test match in Perth."
New Kangaroos coach Mal Meninga, Kiwi counterpart Stephen Kearney and Manly's Kiwi international Martin Taupau were on hand for the announcement in Perth on Wednesday.
Topics: rugby-league, sport, perth-6000, wa, australia
Croatian Club ordered to pay nearly $63k in damages after banning man for political views
Updated
A Canberra club has been ordered to pay a man nearly $63,000 in compensation after he was banned from full membership for his political views in 2011.
Danjiel Kovac told the ACT Administrative Appeal Tribunal the Australian Croatian Club in Turner discriminated against him, because board members disagreed with his views.
He was referred to the tribunal after making a complaint to the Human Rights Commission in 2012.
The tribunal heard that before Mr Kovac's membership was refused by the club, his brother's membership was suspended for six months for alleged aggressive behaviour.
The tribunal was also told Mr Kovac posted allegations about staff and volunteers on Facebook under the name 'Justin Case'.
He also expressed strong opinions about what portraits, flags and emblems should be displayed on the club's walls.
The tribunal heard Mr Kovac was opposed to the use of nationalist symbols affiliated with the Ustaša, a nationalist militia which cooperated with the Nazis during WWII.
In 2014, the tribunal found "the evidence established that the applicant had a general Christian democratic political belief and that he had a strongly-held belief about the need to display portraits, slogans, symbols and emblems that were referable to the current Croatian Government as opposed to earlier regimes".
It found Mr Kovac's views differed from the club's board.
"The political conviction of the applicant may be contrasted with the views of the [board]. The tribunal does not accept that the [board] necessarily held a right-wing, totalitarian political view which is inextricably linked to the right-wing elements of the independent state of Croatia," it said.
"However, the tribunal finds that the use of the terminology 'proud Croatian strategic direction' in the rejection letter and 'in defiance of the political correctness of today' in the newsletter, encompassed a statement about the board's political beliefs which were contrary to the applicant's political conviction."
Mr Kovac said his health had suffered and he was forced to take time off work.
Mr Kovac complained the situation had been made worse by an attempt by the club to introduce into evidence a photograph depicting people he knew holding a Nazi flag, but this was not accepted by the tribunal.
This week the tribunal ordered the club to allow Mr Kovac membership and awarded him $62,817 in damages.
Topics: clubs-and-associations, croatia, canberra-2600, act, australia
First posted
Brisbane could see 50,000 new inner-city apartments added to skyline, industry expert says
Posted
Brisbane could soon see 50,000 units added to its skyline, with demand for inner-city apartment living booming in the capital, industry experts say.
CommSec's latest State of the States report showed Queensland ranked fourth in the country for dwelling commencements.
Property economist Dr Lyndall Bryant, from the Queensland University of Technology, said much of that was due to an apartment boom in Brisbane.
"Dwelling commencements is both apartments and detached housing that you might have out in the suburbs, but the boom that we're having at the moment is certainly in the inner-city apartment market," she said.
Dr Bryant said the number of apartments being built in Brisbane was "staggering".
"There's around 10,000 apartments currently under construction in the Brisbane inner-city," she said.
"There's another 15,000 that are approved and another 15,000 apartments waiting for approval, and add to that another 8,000 that are mooted.
"Add that all up and that's just shy of 50,000 apartments that potentially could come onto the Brisbane housing market."
Bruce Goddard, from Place Projects real estate, said the boom was part of Brisbane's recovery from the global financial crisis (GFC).
Brisbane is approximately 50 per cent cheaper than Sydney and 35 to 40 per cent cheaper than Melbourne. Bruce Goddard, Place Projects
"Over the GFC there was almost no construction — we had no construction for three or four years," he said.
"So there's been a bit of catch up after the financial crisis, and it's that catch up that is showing high volumes now," he said.
He said most major residential buildings were going up in West End, South Brisbane, Fortitude Valley and Teneriffe, with young renters increasingly looking to live close to work.
But he said the demand was being strongly driven by high property prices in Sydney and Melbourne.
"Brisbane is approximately 50 per cent cheaper than Sydney and 35 to 40 per cent cheaper than Melbourne," he said.
"International interest is growing reasonably rapidly, but I think we're seeing a lot of Melbourne and Sydney buyers because Melbourne and Sydney are so dear.
"We track the differences in values between Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne, and the difference is now at a record high."
Mixed reports over possible oversupply in Brisbane
Despite a record number of major residential buildings going up in the city, Mr Goddard said Brisbane was not at risk of having an oversupply of apartments any time soon.
"An oversupply means that there are buildings being built, for which there are no tenants," he said.
"We are nowhere near that at the moment. As the buildings are being built, there are tenants, so there is good tenant demand, and the tenant demand is driving the buyer demand."
But Dr Bryant said she believed Brisbane was nearing its saturation point.
"As an industry we need to keep an eye on when the market gets to the saturation point, and I would predict that we are getting very close to point," she said.
"There's probably not enough demand to absorb all the supply that is proposed to come onto the market.
"If we meet saturation point, which is when demand sort of equals supply, then hopefully market forces would delay further apartments coming on the market.
"It is really important for the general economy that the property industry remain buoyant."
Topics: building-and-construction, business-economics-and-finance, brisbane-4000, qld, australia
Cole Miller: Daniel Maxwell denied bail over one-punch death of Brisbane teen
Updated
A 21-year-old man accused of being involved in the one-punch death of Brisbane teenager Cole Miller has been denied bail.
Mr Miller was on his way home from a night out in Brisbane's Fortitude Valley when he was allegedly punched in the head on January 3.
He was rushed to the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital but died the following day when his life support was turned off.
Daniel Maxwell and Armstrong Renata, both 21, were remanded over the attack and charged with unlawful striking causing death, a charge that carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
Mr Maxwell's lawyer, Michael Bosscher, unsuccessfully tried to argue that he did not deliver the fatal blow.
Mr Bosscher told the court that Maxwell only delivered a punch to the chest and his associate and co-accused, Renata, then punched Mr Miller from behind, knocking him down.
But prosecutors argued that if Maxwell did not instigate the alleged altercation, the deadly blow would not have occurred.
Magristrate Wendy Cull denied the bail application.
Accused attacker hoping for charge to be downgraded
Outside court, Mr Bosscher said he would continue to fight for bail.
"I understand the reasons the magistrate gave but it's certainly a disappointing outcome," he said.
"I spoke to him [Maxwell] very briefly afterwards and he too, of course, is disappointed.
"He's given me instructions now to look at bringing an application to the Supreme Court.
"I imagine we'll do that in the next week or two."
Mr Bosscher said he understood the magistrate's reasons for denying bail, but did not agree with them.
"Certainly we would expect that at some point in time this charge will be downgraded to a different offence," Mr Bosscher said.
"He's going reasonably well as one can expect a 21-year-old male in prison, in the circumstances facing a very difficult charge.
"He's devastated by what's occurred and devastated by the outcome."
Topics: law-crime-and-justice, courts-and-trials, assault, crime, brisbane-4000, qld
First posted
Alanah Pearce fights back
Posted
A screen grab of a message Alanah Peace sent to the mother of one of her trolls.
Topics: social-media, primary-schools, secondary-schools, maroochydore-4558
WA Premier accuses Labor leader Mark McGowan of 'letting down' police force over row with Police Commissioner
Updated
West Australian Premier Colin Barnett has accused Mark McGowan of "letting down" the state's police force, as the row between the Labor leader and Police Commissioner Karl O'Callaghan intensifies.
The Premier's comments come after Mr McGowan accused Mr O'Callaghan of being overly political and siding with the Liberal Party, following a row over the state's new policing model.
Earlier this week, Mr McGowan called for the 'Frontline 2020' model to be scrapped due to rising crime rates.
That prompted an angry rebuke from Mr O'Callaghan, who accused Mr McGowan and Labor's police spokeswoman, Michelle Roberts, of not showing up for briefings on the new policing model.
Mr McGowan then escalated his criticism of the Commissioner, saying he was wrong about the briefings and should not be commenting in such a way regardless.
Mr McGowan has let down our police service in Western Australia, his mistakes are inappropriate, but that is up [to] him to deal with. WA Premier Colin Barnett
"As Police Commissioner of Western Australia, to attack the Opposition Leader and be wrong in your attack is frankly unacceptable," Mr McGowan said.
"But the fact of the matter is the Police Commissioner should not engage in political debate."
Mr O'Callaghan defended his comments, saying he was best placed to respond to criticism of the strategy and explain the detail of it to the public.
"Naturally I have to be the one to respond to that," he said.
"I can't not respond because someone thinks it's political."
Mr McGowan also made it clear Mr O'Callaghan would not be receiving a contract extension if Labor won the 2017 election, with the Commissioner's contract due to expire in the months after that poll.
Mr O'Callaghan had previously said he would not be seeking an extension.
Mr McGowan's criticisms of Mr O'Callaghan drew an angry response from Mr Barnett, who backed the Commissioner's performance.
"I have full confidence in the Police Commissioner and our police men and women," Mr Barnett said.
"Mr McGowan has let down our police service in Western Australia, his mistakes are inappropriate, but that is up [to] him to deal with.
"[Karl O'Callaghan] conducts himself as a very proper leader of our police service ... he is an honest, forthright person and I think West Australians admire our Police Commissioner."
Topics: government-and-politics, law-crime-and-justice, police, perth-6000
First posted
Triplets excited for first day of school as Queensland students return
Posted
It is a big day for thousands of Queensland families who sent their children off for their first day of school, but for the Paterson family it is three times as special.
Today their set of five-year-old triplets - William, Morris and Edmond - went to school for their first day of prep.
Their parents, Stephanie and David Paterson, agreed it was a day of mixed emotions.
"I'm extremely excited but also a little upset about seeing my babies going to school for the first time," Ms Paterson said.
"The boys are extremely interested in science and reading and books and I'm very excited that they'll get a chance to learn all about that."
Mr Paterson said there were a few nerves but it was a "big milestone for this family".
"Lots of prep work goes into it courtesy of their wonderful mother," he said.
Ms Paterson said the triplets were ready for school before eight o'clock.
"I love my list, it's been lots of prep work coming up to today but that means it all runs smoothly today," she said.
"They slept in until six o'clock, which surprised me."
The family walked together to East Brisbane State School, and those mixed emotions bubbled to the surface.
"I'm confident they'll be fine, seeing as they've wandered off already," Ms Paterson said.
"But it's tough. I'm going to have a little cry later."
When the triplets were asked what they were looking forward to about school, they had one answer.
"Learning ... science."
The three of them agreed there was one thing they were particularly looking forward to doing in science class.
"Explosions," they said.
The boys also said they were looking forward to making friends with other boys.
More than 800,000 Queensland students headed back to school today for the first day of the school year.
It has been a record year for Queensland enrolments, with about 11,000 new students walking through the gates today.
Education Minister Kate Jones said the increase in enrolments was attributed to more students starting prep.
"We've seen more and more parents seeing the value of prep and we're seeing enrolment at more than 98 per cent attendance," Ms Jones said.
"For the first time in 2016 our digital technologies curriculums will be rolled out, giving kids a chance to learn more about coding and robotics to give them the skills they need for the future.
"In 2016 this school year, four new state schools have opened their doors at Caboolture West, Ripley Valley, Pine Rivers and Pallara, also for the first time."
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said an extra 290 teachers were starting in state schools this year.
"These teachers are part of my Government's plan for 875 new teachers over the next three years," Ms Palaszczuk said.
"This is about restoring frontline services, it's about making sure our classes function effectively, it's about making sure teachers give our kids the best start for the future."
The Premier said 15 extra guidance officers would also join state high schools.
Topics: schools, education, brisbane-4000, qld, australia
Police happy with crowds at Hunter region Australia Day celebrations
Updated
Newcastle police have praised the behaviour of thousands of Australia Day revellers, saying they made only a handful of arrests.
With an estimated 15,000 people gathering to celebrate on Newcastle's foreshore and Honeysuckle precinct, police said they were pleased to see very little anti-social behaviour.
One man was arrested over a minor assault at Newcastle Beach, another for allegedly stealing a tip jar from a Honeysuckle restaurant.
I remember in 2008 as a duty officer here in Newcastle, driving alone late at night, I certainly didn't feel 100 per cent safe. Chief Inspector Terry Burns, Newcastle local area command
Two men were charged over the theft of alcohol from a shop at Marketown shopping centre in Newcastle West.
Police responded to several noise complaints as parties got rowdy.
One backyard party in Croudace Street, Lambton attracted more than 100 uninvited guests, who had heard about the event on social media.
Neighbours called police worried about the noise and possible assaults and the partygoers were moved on without incident.
At midnight, a car crashed into a power pole at Belmont South and a police sniffer dog was used to track down the driver who had fled the scene.
A man was arrested soon after and taken to hospital with dog bite wounds.
Police: city's violent culture has changed
Newcastle police say the culture of the city's Australia Day celebrations has changed dramatically, with no sign now of the violent and drunken assaults seen in previous years.
Six years ago police spent Australia Day responding to a series of alcohol-fuelled fights, some involving children as young as 12.
Chief Inspector Terry Burns from Newcastle local area command said this year's event went off without a hitch, despite an estimated 15,000 revellers flocking to the foreshore.
"I don't think there's any one reason, the whole thing is a police and community approach," he said.
"It started in 2008 with the licensing lockout laws, we introduced consequence policing, zero tolerance to anti-social and violent behaviour.
"Just the culture in Newcastle is changing for the better.
"I remember in 2008 as a duty officer here in Newcastle, driving alone late at night, I certainly didn't feel 100 per cent safe."
Topics: australia-day, police, newcastle-2300, lambton-2299, belmont-2280, muswellbrook-2333
First posted
Pinery bushfire: Farmers say EPA causing confusion over rubble disposal from properties
Updated
Farmers trying to rebuild their properties after the Pinery bushfire in South Australia are growing frustrated by conflicting information provided by the Environment Protection Authority (EPA) on how they can dispose of rubble on their properties.
Key points: EPA told demolition contractor bushfire rubble cannot be buried on properties
Pinery fire affected famer faces $30k fee to remove rubble
EPA says initial information was incorrect
The fire, which started on November 25, killed two people and burnt through more than 85,000 hectares of land.
John Lush's son was one of many who lost their home in the bushfire.
"Most of this fire situation has been upsetting, but people are going to be getting really angry about red tape and regulation if it gets in our road to getting things back to normal," Mr Lush said.
"Everybody in this fire zone wants to get back to normal and when we see things being said and done that are just not common sense, I get pretty angry, pretty quick."
Following the fires, the Lush family called in Malcolm Heinrich's EPA-accredited company to demolish the ruin and dispose of the rubble.
Mr Heinrich said he was told by the EPA he could not bury the rubble on the Lush property, despite it being free of asbestos and chemicals, but instead would have to dump the rubbish at a landfill site.
"They [the EPA] emphatically said, no burial of any material at all on site," Mr Heinrich said.
"He even went on to say that if we were caught burying stuff on site, he would deem us as an illegal landfill operation.
"He also said that 'we will take action, we will come and charge you and pursue it legally' and not only us as a contractor, the farmer as well."
Mr Heinrich said the advice later softened and he was told by the EPA if everything was smashed to the size of half a house brick it could be buried on the property.
But Mr Heinrich said that was not an option, and dumping the rubble at landfill would cost the Lush family about $30,000.
"It's a big cost and people are hurting, they don't have that money," Mr Heinrich said.
"If we could break it down to half the size of a brick we probably could put it through our own crushing plants and make rubble out of it and reuse it this way, on site even."
EPA says claims are 'incorrect'
Mr Heinrich and Mr Lush said they were also told by the EPA officer they would not be able to burn pine trees affected by the fires after the fire ban season.
"We're going to have piles of wood standing around for years that look like a very unsightly thing, and we're going to have piles of concrete in the corner of the yard because we haven't got a spare $30,000 to spend on something that is not necessary," Mr Lush said.
I don't think it is their policy, I think it's somebody running around applying their own interpretation of what the policy is. John Lush, farmer
In a statement to the ABC, the EPA said information being passed onto Mr Heinrich and Mr Lush was incorrect.
"Claims that affected landowners cannot dispose of waste on-site on their properties are incorrect," the EPA said.
"Fire-affected demolition material can be disposed on private land with the permission of the owner, provided the material does not contain waste such as asbestos or chemicals, or cause harm to the human health or risk to the environment."
Mr Lush believed there was some confusion within the EPA.
"I don't think it is their policy, I think it's somebody running around applying their own interpretation of what the policy is," Mr Lush said.
"My message is, this is not right, it's wrong. And we need to do something about things that are wrong in this world, there are too many of them."
Topics: bushfire, fires, disasters-and-accidents, mallala-5502, freeling-5372, sa, australia
First posted
What do producers need to know to tap into export markets and make the most of free trade agreements?
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Surely it's a good thing that Tony Abbott is staying
Updated
Tony Abbott still has much to contribute to Parliament, but the same can't be said for others like Philip Ruddock and Bronwyn Bishop who are clinging tenaciously, and ungraciously, to safe seats that should be given to the best and brightest candidates, writes Terry Barnes.
Annabel Crabb has made a highly successful career out of understanding what makes our federal MPs and federal party leaders tick.
In April 2010, she said of Malcolm Turnbull to Leigh Sales, then presenter of Lateline, when Turnbull announced he was quitting politics:
I suspect that this is a good result for Tony Abbott and the party.
Beaten by Abbott by just one vote, Turnbull announced four months later that he was pulling the pin on his then six-year political career.
Yet, just a month later, after some reflection and friendly advice from former prime minister John Howard, Turnbull reversed his decision. He still had something to contribute, and contribute he has. Turnbull's decision to stay was greeted at the time with as much enthusiasm as Abbott's similar decision this week was scorned. But why?
Despite Crabb's mildly satirical take in The Drum on Monday, Abbott staying is a good thing. Just as in 2010 Turnbull's staying on told small "L" Liberals and Liberal-leaning progressives that there was still a place for them in Abbott's broad church, Abbott's decision sends a message to conservatives that the pews to the Right of Turnbull won't be chopped up and turned into firewood.
Given a great many Liberal party members - the letterbox-stuffing foot-sloggers rather than ambitious MPs and party bosses - hold values far closer to Abbott's than Turnbull's, that alone should help ensure enough disgruntled campaign worker bees hold their noses and help Turnbull in the lead-up to this year's federal election. Surely that alone would be a good thing for the Prime Minister.
But, above all, Abbott himself still has a lot to offer. At 58, he is young and energetic enough to learn from his mistakes and revive as a politician. He has over a decade's ministerial experience as well as six years as party leader and PM. His experience and deep insights into, and passions for, domestic, foreign and national security policy can and should be invaluable assets for the Turnbull government. He can be a cabinet minister again, if not leader.
Long-term Abbott friend and confidant, The Australian's Greg Sheridan, is as close to a personal spokesman for Abbott as you will get. He wrote this week:
Abbott is no Kevin Rudd. He is not motivated by revenge or any delusion of return to the prime ministership.
If Sheridan indeed is channelling Abbott, then a self-awareness missing since he lost the leadership - an understanding that actions by him, and those empowered by him, helped bring him down - finally is dawning. With it comes the likelihood that MP Abbott will be a genuine future contributor rather than an embittered ex-PM like John Gorton or Billy McMahon, clinging pathetically to the backbench waiting for a never-coming recall.
And if Abbott flies to the United States to commune with like-minded conservatives, so bloody what? That he has conservative social and philosophical views is hardly a revelation, nor a disqualification for continuing in public life.
While Abbott retains his energy and commitment to the Coalition cause, he deserves to keep his safe seat of Warringah. The same cannot be said for his ageing colleagues, Philip Ruddock and Bronwyn Bishop.
Ruddock has been an MP since the solitary glory year of the Whitlam government, 1973. He's been there so long that recently he sent himself up by wearing a 1970s-style safari suit in the House and tweeting the results. Ruddock was a successful immigration minister and attorney-general under Howard, but that was a decade ago. Now he simply seems intent on self-parody, hanging around merely to beat Billy Hughes's 52-year record tenure, like Geoffrey Boycott playing for his average and not the team.
Ruddock's likely successor is Julian Leeser, lawyer, writer, academic and former director of the Liberal Party's Menzies Research Centre. Leeser has the brains and political ability to adorn future Liberal frontbenches and be, like Labor's Andrew Leigh, a one-person policy dynamo in government or opposition. He has been waiting patiently in the wings for years while mentor Ruddock warms his seat of Berowra. Leeser's time is now.
As for Bishop, she's announced she's going nowhere, apparently to save us all from terrorist Armageddon. Her heyday was 1994, when mischievous media and then desperate Liberals created a hysterical "Bronwyn for PM" bubble that soon was pricked. Everything Bishop has done since, however, only highlighted the delusion of those days: she proved a dud junior minister, a dud Speaker; and highly treacherous into the bargain. We can fight terrorism without her.
Abbott, Ruddock, Bishop and aspirant Leeser highlight the vital importance of safe seats in our politics. They should be reserved for candidates with outstanding potential to contribute at the highest levels of government and opposition as well as locally. They should not be the last resting places of extinct political volcanoes, or playthings for undeserving party bosses, factional and union hacks, or local branch warlords.
Yet too often the party games both sides play will install undistinguished candidates who become undistinguished MPs, or allow former greats to become living fossils. We, the voting public, are the losers.
So while extinct volcanoes like Ruddock and Bishop cling tenaciously, and very ungraciously, to their safe seats, genuinely talented MPs like Liberal Bruce Billson in Dunkley (Victoria) and Labor's Melissa Parke in Fremantle (WA) are quitting at this election. This talented pair are going way before their time, and their great ability and principled politics will be great losses to the Parliament and public life. In Parke's case, union-backed non-entities already are circling her seat, and nominations for Billson's have just closed.
If only both parties ensure such plum seats are always filled by the best and brightest candidates - in other words, by more Julian Leesers. If only.
Terry Barnes is a policy consultant, former senior Howard government adviser, and weekly columnist for The Drum. Twitter: @TerryBarnes5.
Topics: liberals, federal-government, federal-parliament, abbott-tony
First posted
Carpentaria Mayor Fred Pascoe says the positives of the Century Zinc mine for Gulf communities far outweigh the negative
Posted
The loss of the region's largest ratepayer and private employer when Century Zinc mine closes is a challenge for which mayor of Carpentaria Shire Council, Fred Pascoe, and his community has been bracing for several years. Cr Pascoe said some skilled workers have been absorbed by the council and local cattle stations but the closure coincided with significant downturns in the beef cattle, fishing and mining sectors.
Source: ABC Rural | Duration: 4min 22sec
Topics: mining-rural, native-title, mining-industry, community-development, karumba-4891, mount-isa-4825
Meet the flood-predicting community of fishermen who refused to evacuate Wooliana
Updated
Daly River resident and well-known fisherman Harold Sinclair has lost count of the times floodwaters have crept up his driveway in the past four decades.
Mr Sinclair bought his Wooliana property in 1973, back when he was a Darwin-based painter with little knowledge about his new weekend retreat's location on a floodplain.
We're all a pretty close community. We're all in touch with each other. We all know what each other is doing. We keep in contact with each other. Harold Sinclair, Wooliana resident
"I didn't even give it a thought," he said.
"I just came fishing and fell in love with the river. It was a good idea at the time."
The first flood came less than a year later in 1974 and was followed by several others, including the once-in-a-lifetime 1998 floods that put half a metre of water through Mr Sinclair's house and deluged lower-lying communities Nauiyu and Katherine.
"Over the years, you learn about different floods, different situations, where the water is coming from and different readings up the river," he said.
It is a similar story from other fishermen, retirees and property owners in tiny Wooliana — a tight-knit community that intimately knows its metre-long barramundi, river systems, and the unavoidable chance of floods.
"If it looked like [the river] was coming up really quick and getting a bit dicky, we'd say let's start preparing the community hall," Mr Sinclair said.
"We know the river is a bit of a dangerous situation but we had the hall built [above the floodplain on a hill] in 1992.
"We're all a pretty close community. We're all in touch with each other. We all know what each other is doing. We keep in contact with each other."
So when the monsoonal rains came again in December and emergency reports initially suggested evacuating, the community of Wooliana was ready to put up a fight.
Decision to stay not taken lightly
Mr Sinclair's neighbour and tourist park owner Adrian Koenen was one of the Wooliana residents that received calls from emergency services as the Daly River swelled.
Mr Koenen said the rise of the river was one of the fastest he had seen during his 16 years in the area, however he and other long-term locals were not too concerned after double checking their records.
"Emergency services indicated it would come up to 16.5 metres," Mr Koenen said.
"[That] would have been right up there. It would have been within a couple hundred millimetres of the 1998 floods.
"My friend up the road has been keeping records for 35 years and, looking at his records, that was proven otherwise.
"We don't have a wish list. We deal very pragmatically in facts. Emergency services was adamant but we tried to be objective."
Mark Cunnington, acting regional manager of northern operations for NT Emergency Services, told 105.7 ABC Darwin that he was unsure what specific forecasts were given to Wooliana community members by emergency personnel and local police during the Daly River floods.
However, under the NT Fire and Emergency Act they could have evicted residents, he said.
"We have the power to do so in declared situations [if] we believe people aren't adequately prepared," Mr Cunnington said.
"But at the same time, when we go to these places, we know people can be quite well prepared. We'd assume that officers who go around to them would understand that."
This appears to have happened in Wooliana — locals stayed despite a visit to Mr Koenen by police. And the river, this time around, did not go beyond residents' predictions of 14.7 metres.
This rise was still enough to cut off Wooliana's roads and bring water within four metres of Mr Sinclair's front porch, as well as flood homes in nearby lower-lying Nauiyu, which was placed under a state of emergency and evacuated for two weeks.
Mr Koenen said that deciding to stay, no matter how prepared the community, is not a decision to be taken lightly.
"It's like people in the east and west coast recently with the nasty fires. If you stay to defend your property, there comes a time when you can't leave," Mr Koenen said.
We've discussed this frequently, that we would not make demands on the system if we stay other than a medical emergency. I'm not a spring chicken and my wife wasn't born yesterday. Adrian Koenen, Wooliana resident
"We've discussed this frequently, that we would not make demands on the system if we stay other than a medical emergency. I'm not a spring chicken and my wife wasn't born yesterday.
"But we can always leave, no matter what happens. In one flood we had, I actually took a boat out to the front gate, along the road and to the school."
But why even live in a place where floods are such a regular consideration?
Mr Sinclair said he stayed in the region — despite not paying for flood insurance on his property as premiums are too expensive — because he simply wanted to end out his days in the outback fishing.
"I think it comes back to when I first came here and fell in love with the place," he said.
"This is my retirement. I'm getting on a bit. Should I mention I was born in 1940?"
Topics: floods, emergency-incidents, human-interest, fishing-aquaculture, darwin-0800
First posted
Fig trees, aged more than 130 years old, along Sydney's Anzac Parade earmarked for felling in light-rail project
Updated
There is photographic evidence that disputes claims from environmental campaigners that fig trees being ripped out along Anzac Parade in Sydney's east were planted to commemorate the Anzacs, the Department of Transport has said.
Workers pruned and felled several trees at Moore Park today, with a total of 17 to be removed to make way for the CBD and south-east light rail construction.
Jeff Angel, from the Total Environment Centre, said it had now come to light that dozens of trees earmarked for removal in the next few weeks were planted in 1917 in honour of the Anzacs.
"I think the Government should hit the pause button," he said.
"The public are horrified by the tree clearing already going on and by the new chainsaw attack on these Anzac Parade trees planted in 1917 to commemorate the Anzacs.
"They will find that an even more revolting action."
But a spokesman for the Department of Transport said a photo from 1914 showed troops marching through Moore Park on their way to board ships at Circular Quay past what appeared to be fairly mature figs.
The spokesman argued that this supported the "established understanding that the trees date to the 1870s-1880s".
About 40 other trees — thought to be 100 years old — were removed along Alison Road earlier this month.
People chained themselves to the trees in protest but were unsuccessful in stopping the felling.
Mr Angel said it was never good to be known as the "chainsaw government".
"It's much better to admit you've made a mistake and we invite Mike Baird, Planning Minister Rob Stokes and Transport Minister Andrew Constance to come out here and talk to the community who know the value of these trees," he said.
"It's a mistake to say to the public 'we've consulted you' when it was just a tick the box, token exercise."
He said new saplings would not replace the heritage of the trees.
We are doing everything we can to minimise the impact, I know that's distressing to some people. NSW Premier, Mike Baird
Local resident and campaigner Annie Haque told 702 ABC Sydney the tree lopping was "sad and ironic".
"I understand they were planted a year or two after the Anzacs marched down that very long avenue ... to Circular Quay to go and fight our country," she said.
"So many of these figs that line Anzac Parade were planted ... in commemoration of our soldiers who fought so bravely on our behalf and they were a gift, to us, the grandchildren of the nation to commemorate the Anzacs, and they're heritage trees."
State Opposition Leader Luke Foley said light rail did not have to come at the expense of hundreds of trees of such heritage value and significance.
"The local council and the local government have put forward an alternative route alignment," Mr Foley said.
Mr Foley said it only required the line to be moved by metres and he had raised the proposal with the Government, but had not had a response.
"The community can have light rail along the Anzac Parade corridor without the carnage of these trees of inestimable heritage value."
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull was urged to intervene by the federal member for Kingsford Smith.
Labor MP Matt Thistlewaite joined a group of 30 protestors at the site and said the trees were in Mr Turnbull's electorate.
"My message to the Prime Minister today is simple: End this madness. Pick up the phone to Mike Baird and halt the destruction of these trees which are attributed to the ANZAC's and part of Sydney's character and heritage," Mr Thistlewaite said.
More trees will be planted as replacement: Premier Baird
Premier Mike Baird said the Government had done all it could to minimise the number of trees that had to be chopped down to make way for the light rail.
He said "significantly more" trees would be planted to replace them.
"If there's a small tree ... we're going replace it with two trees, a medium sized tree with four trees and a large tree with eight," Mr Baird said.
"We are going to try to do it as close as possible to where they have come down.
"We are doing everything we can to minimise the impact, I know that's distressing to some people."
Ms Haque said the replanting programs would not adequately compensate the loss.
"There's no way this is like for like, you can't possibly do that, it's taken 100 years, it will take 100 years until we have like for like," she said.
Ms Haque told 702 ABC Sydney protestors would regularly be present on Anzac Parade.
"You can expect to see a lot of protestors along that whole stretch," she said.
"A lot of people are extremely fired up, it's a very emotional issue."
NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance said the Government would plant more than 1,500 trees as a result of the light rail project.
"There has been a lot of work put in to try to minimise the disruption to trees and vegetation associated with this project, but the reality is you can't do the big build without a disruption to vegetation," Mr Constance said.
Topics: environment, environmental-impact, environmental-management, randwick-2031, nsw, australia
First posted
Darwin Police search for stolen Rebels bikie gang vests worth $45,000
Updated
Northern Territory Police are attempting to track down three patched motorcycle vests belonging to a gang described as a criminal network.
Superintendent Clint Sims from the Drug and Organised Crime Squad said the Rebels bikie vests were stolen during a break-in at a private residence last Friday night.
"It's believed the vests have a value of up to $15,000 each" he said.
The vests were stolen from a house in the rural suburb of Virginia.
The Rebels are classified as an outlaw motorcycle gang in the Territory and have been told by Police Commissioner Reece Kershaw they are not welcome in the Top End.
In 2015 the club's president was assaulted in an attack that police believe was inflicted by members of a rival club, the Comancheros.
The attack prompted NT Police to warn of a feud between the two bikie gangs, saying they feared the public could be put at risk.
Topics: crime, bees-creek-0822
First posted
Michael Jennings to debut for Parramatta against former club Penrith
Posted
Five years after declaring his undying hate for western Sydney rivals Parramatta, new Eels buy Michael Jennings will make his club debut against former team Penrith.
Coach Brad Arthur has opted against taking his star recruit to Auckland for the Nines, and will instead unveil Jennings in front of his old fans in their trial at Penrith Stadium on February 20.
The Kangaroos representative, who spent his first six seasons as a Panther, said he would never have predicted turning out in the blue and gold.
"I wouldn't expect to be playing for Parramatta being a Penrith junior, but that's just the way it is now," he said on Wednesday.
The 27-year-old said his comments from 2011, when he said he didn't hate the Parramatta players "just the team they represent', had attracted plenty of friendly abuse from his new team-mates.
But he was ready for more potential backlash from the Panthers faithful in a fortnight.
"That was just a young boy, that's just a passionate Penrith boy," he said.
"You had that rivalry when you're playing for Harold Matthews and SG Ball. I look back at it now, it's pretty funny.
"It's good for the fans, they love it. And you enjoy that rivalry. It makes you motivated to play your best footy."
Jennings has spent the past three seasons with the Sydney Roosters, winning a premiership and establishing himself as one of the premier centres in the competition.
He also helped New South Wales break Queensland's eight-year reign in State of Origin in 2014.
The Blues mainstay said he would have liked to extend his career at Bondi, but was swayed by the security of a four-year contract offered to him by the Eels.
He will be 31 by the time his new deal expires.
"It was a hard decision but at the same time, I had to do the best for myself and my family and my wife. The decision was a good one," he said.
"It was a long-term opportunity here, and to secure that and get that this year is probably the main reason."
AAP
Topics: nrl, rugby-league, sport, penrith-2750, nsw, australia
National beef cattle herd forecast to hit record low in 2017
Posted
Australian beef processors will feel the pinch in the next 12 months with estimates national cattle numbers are headed for a record low.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) predicts beef production will drop to 25.9 million head in 2017, its lowest level in 24 years.
MLA manager of market information Ben Thomas said numbers had been forced down by drought and higher production.
Producers in Queensland and New South Wales have experienced significant issues with drought conditions this season.
Mr Thomas said Australia had been through several years of "extremely high cattle turnoff" with processed product and live exports reaching record levels.
"Our estimates are that it's dropped from what was the highest cattle herd in more than 30 years," he said.
"In 2014 it was at just above 29 million head to now what is estimated to be just 26.2 million head."
MLA figures show the slaughter of adult cattle is tipped to slump 16 per cent this year to 7.6 million head, which is one of the largest yearly drops ever recorded.
Mr Thomas said he anticipated production would increase again in the next five years.
"By the time we got out to 2020 we are estimating that the national herd will be back [to normal]," he said.
"[It should return] to about the 10-year annual herd size, which is 27 million head."
Potential for processors to be hit hard
Beef cattle supply affected a New South Wales processor this week as more than 150 workers lost their jobs at a JBS abattoir in Scone.
The news comes just two months after the processor extended its shutdown period at a Queensland site.
Mr Thomas said while it was clear herd numbers were in decline, he said it was too difficult to determine whether there would be job cuts or closures at beef processors.
"It's a really difficult question to answer without knowing how this year will play out first," he said.
"[We don't know] exactly the numbers will come forward."
But Mr Thomas said he did not believe production would drop significantly further.
He said the 7.6 million of head cattle estimated for processing in 2016 was "very much in line" with the 10-year average.
Domestic processing to suffer more than live export
MLA 2016 cattle industry projections show there will be a shift to higher proportions of live cattle exported.
Mr Thomas said there would be a year-on-year decline in live cattle exports due to supply issues.
But he said the decline in live exports would be "slightly less significant" than the decline in processed cattle.
"That's simply because of the extremely strong demand we're seeing for our cattle in Vietnam and Indonesia at the moment," he said.
"As well as other markets such as Philippines, Malaysia and some in the Middle East."
Topics: beef-cattle, cattle-feedlots, perth-6000
Panoramic Resources' Savannah nickel mine in WA to close
Updated
A nickel mine in Western Australia's Kimberley region will close after becoming the latest casualty of the low nickel price.
Panoramic Resources will place its Savannah nickel mine near Halls Creek onto care and maintenance in the coming months.
Key points: Panoramic Resources' Savannah nickel mine to be shut down
About 50 workers made redundant
Low nickel prices blamed for closure

In a statement to the ASX, Panoramic said given the nickel price, the company believed it was in the best interest of shareholders to preserve the remaining resource.
Managing director Peter Harold said about 50 workers were made redundant today.
"It's a very sad day for the workforce today. A lot of those people who were let go today were with us for a very long time, some over 10 years," he said.
"The decision has been made not lightly by the board — we're just not sure when prices are going to recover.
"We understand that somewhere between 70 and 80 per cent of the world's nickel producers are losing money at these levels, so clearly it's unsustainable."
Prices will recover: Panoramic
Panoramic said it may re-start operations at Savannah when the nickel price improved.
"It's funnily enough back down to levels that it was at when we first started the company 15 years ago," Mr Harold said.
"We did the scoping study in the original feasibility study using $3.60 nickel and I think a couple of weeks ago it was back at that price.
"I'm just so proud of what we've achieved and I know there's a future here.
"Prices will recover and Savannah will go on and continue to be a mine."
Mining analyst Peter Strachan said Panoramic's decision made sense.
"It's best to keep that ore in the ground and in a year's time or 18 months' time, if the nickel price bounces back to $US5 or $US6 a pound and the copper price is over $US2, they'll be able to reopen it with very little disruption," Mr Strachan said.
Company in good position to restart: analyst
Panoramic's ASX announcement came on the same day the company announced its Savannah North project, 600 metres from the Savannah mine, was projected to have an eight-year mine life.
Mr Strachan said when the time was right, Panoramic would be in a good position to continue operating.
"They have confidence in the mine long-term, there's no shortage of resources there," he said.
Mr Strachan said it was likely there would be more nickel price casualties, but the price would soon bottom out.
"Globally there will be a cascading effect of high-cost producers leaving the market, and when you see that it's typically the bottom of the cycle, and I suspect in 12 months' time the nickel price in fact will be higher," he said.
About 110 workers were made redundant when the company closed its Lanfranchi operation near Kambalda last year.
It comes after mining magnate Clive Palmer's troubled Queensland Nickel refinery went into voluntary administration, leaving more than 230 workers out of a job.
The current price of nickel is $US3.93 per pound.
Topics: mining-rural, mining-industry, halls-creek-6770
First posted
Melbourne artist pays tribute to David Bowie in Gippsland mural
Posted
Paying tribute to the death of musical icon David Bowie, Melbourne illustrator Hayden Dewar painted a mural in Morwell to remember the unforgettable legacy Bowie left the world.
The street art mural was organised a local Morwell resident and Mr Dewar's Melbourne-based friend Skot Edwards.
Mr Dewar already had a few designs drawn up for the Bowie artwork, but it was only when news of his passing broke did it become the subject of the wall.
"I had a design that wasn't dissimilar to what I did with the face, with similar swirling colourful forms around it. It wasn't too hard to alter it to be like a Bowie tribute," he told ABC Gippsland.
"I've been a fan of his work, and [so have] people been around in my life, so I thought it would be a cool thing to do."
By being able to pay tribute to Bowie, Mr Dewar had the creative freedom to express a certain aspect of the man.
"I illustrated, I guess his spirit or essence, leaving the physical form," he said.
"I know his work had themes about mental illness ... that's been a consistent theme in his lyrics and his work."
Given two days to complete the mural, Mr Dewar had to work fast.
"To work with the new design I added more colours to illustrate how colourful his [David Bowie's] creative genius was," Mr Dewar said.
The mural has received positive feedback so far and community members have raised concerns over the possibility of vandalism.
By virtue of creating artworks in a public domain, there will always be a risk of tagging. But, Mr Dewar said, there is usually an unwritten rule to leave higher quality pieces alone.
"That's a possibility so you kind of let it go — that's the nature of doing work on an outdoor surface," Mr Dewar said.
"Kind of lives online now too, with good photos, so it's not a total loss."
Topics: street-art, morwell-3840
Families SA industrial action talks to focus on staff shortages, increasing workloads
Posted
Families SA workers will meet to discuss industrial action over staff shortages and increasing workloads, with their union predicting work bans are likely to escalate this week.
Hundreds of Families SA staff started closing offices for an hour a day earlier this week and refused to work overtime in protest against working conditions.
Public Service Association's Simon Johnson said he understood the number of vacancies in the department had grown to 120.
He said members would meet tonight to discuss further action.
"I am confident if the department doesn't come clean about where those vacancies exist — and where they exist in different centres — then members won't tolerate continuing delay in providing them with information, they will take what action is necessary," he said.
The Department of Education and Child Development said it had significantly reduced vacancies through a recruitment campaign.
It said 476 applicants had been recommended for roles during the past 12 months and a recruitment strategy had been put in place to fill remaining vacancies this year.
Topics: government-and-politics, welfare, community-and-society, adelaide-5000, sa
Matthew Braithwaite is new kid on the block in Australian children's music scene
Updated
Not many children's songs are written about getting your finger jammed in a car door, but Matthew Braithwaite's catchy tune Owie! is not standard fare.
If the 50 dancing, cheering kids listening at Mount Gambier Library, in South Australia's south-east, are anything to go by, Braithwaite is onto a winner.
Now based in China's bustling capital of Shanghai, the former Mount Gambier resident is busy carving out a career in the world of children's music, alongside popular Australian players such as the Wiggles and Justine Clarke.
I Have a Go! is all about positive dispositions for learning and developing them in young children. The title track is about as long as I've done my best, I'm happy with that. Matthew Braithwaite, children's music recording artist
Braithwaite's first album, I Have a Go! is full of songs with an educational message, but wrapped in an infectious package of catchy tunes and lyrics cleverly designed to weave their way into the minds of children.
The story behind the 33-year-old's new musical path began in London, when he met a group of youngsters while working for a charity organisation bringing children with severe facial deformities to London for surgery.
"These children were coming from parts of the world — Kenya, Vietnam, Uganda — where they were ostracised for the way they looked, whether it was from trauma, birth or war," Braithwaite said.
"The new lease on life they got from coming to London to have this surgery was astounding.
"I couldn't believe how much positivity there was, and optimism and cheerfulness."
Because the children could not speak English, Braithwaite learned to speak to them another way — through music.
Singing little ditties he had made up, Braithwaite realised he had a knack for making kids smile, no matter what their circumstances.
Not only that, he thoroughly enjoyed writing songs to entertain his young audience.
After spending all day with young children, sometimes suffering terrible pain from their surgeries, Braithwaite got an insight into the other side of the charity world at night, where he would sit at black-tie fundraising dinners alongside the Murdochs and the Oppenheimers.
"I sat there and thought 'I'm from Mount Gambier, what am I doing here?" he said.
The experience strengthened his resolve 'to do something to give back to the world'," he said.
All about having a go in life
After a change of career and a move to China, he started to write songs, deciding on a central theme that resonated with him in his own childhood.
"With my upbringing, I was always encouraged to have a go and I didn't have to be the best," he said.
"I Have a Go! is all about positive dispositions for learning and developing them in young children.
"I always remember curiosity, persistence and commitment [and] the title track is about as long as I've done my best, I'm happy with that."
Braithwaite said a lot of children's music focussed on movement and doing fun things, but he also wanted to touch on themes not normally considered standard children's music fare, which is how songs like Owie! came about.
Even a painful experience like a jammed finger in a car door could be turned around into more positive fare by simply adding some catchy lyrics and a little fun into the mix, he said.
Lucky for Braithwaite, he could harness his own family's musical talent, with his brother Sean writing the music and sister Jessica, also a reporter for Adelaide's Nine News, moonlighting on the album.
When it came to actually producing and recording the music, Braithwaite went straight to the top, seeking out the names behind recent Wiggles and Justine Clarke compilations, and getting in nationally recognised musicians to "add some magic" to the songs.
There were some "pinch-me" moments along the way too.
At Sydney recording studio Studios 301, the trio walked into the same studio just occupied the day before by Lana Del Ray and shared the same engineer used by Kanye West and Lady Gaga.
After recording finished, Braithwaite embarked on his own mini-advertising campaign, reading artists blogs about the best way to get radio airplay, launching his own youTube channel and sending the preview CD out to stations across the world months before his official launch date of February 19.
The warm reception surprised him, with one US station emailing him immediately and telling him "love it, playing it, adding to rotation from tomorrow morning", he said.
Songs await their biggest critics
But the one reaction he was most nervously awaiting was that of a bunch of kids from his hometown of Mount Gambier.
Booked to perform the songs for the first time at the library's popular Storytime session, Braithwaite began by telling 50 eager little faces: "I have to warn you, I'm not the best singer and I'm not the best dancer, but I have a go!"
It took less than a minute before all the previously quiet kids were on their feet, loudly singing along as a delighted Braithwaite went through his repertoire.
"I probably had more fun than the kids," he said.
At the end of the session, a woman brought her young son up to meet him.
"She said she wanted to introduce me to her son, because he's very shy and he very rarely gets involved in anything," he said.
"But she told me he had a wonderful time and he got up and danced.
"That meant so much to me. That's what it's all about."
Topics: early-music, music, library-museum-and-gallery, children, mount-gambier-5290, china
First posted
Andrew Carville death: Police work to identify man seen at Majura on night of disappearance
Posted
ACT police hope to identify a man they believe is connected to the death of Evatt local Andrew Carville, whose body was found in grassland in Majura last year.
Mr Carville, who was in his 50s, disappeared on November 4, and his body was found in grassland two weeks later.
Police today said they were trying to identify a man in dark clothing, seen walking along Sutton Road in Majura and Norton Road in Wamboin, NSW, late at night on November 4, and in the early hours of November 5.
"The man is described as being between 180 and 186cm tall, of a solid build, with an olive complexion, short black hair, dark eyebrows, dark-coloured eyes," Detective Senior Constable Jarryd Dunbar said.
Senior Constable Dunbar said the man was wearing dark clothing and shoes.
"He was last sighted on Norton Road in Wamboin, but we believe that he probably travelled up to Norton Road north along Sutton Road earlier that morning," he said.
"We suspect that this person may have an involvement in the disappearance and murder of Andrew Carville."
Senior Constable Dunbar urged anyone who saw the man to contact Crime Stoppers.
Earlier this month police identified two people as suspects in the murder.
One of the suspects was the owner of a Toyota LandCruiser found crashed at Molonglo Gorge near Queanbeyan.
Police had been looking to identify the owner of an orange ute seen parked on the side of a road in Fraser on the night Mr Carville disappeared.
They have since identified that person, and said they were not a suspect.
Topics: murder-and-manslaughter, crime, police, law-crime-and-justice, canberra-2600, act, australia
Auburn Council challenges State Government's plan to suspend its operation during public inquiry
Updated
Auburn Council, which made headlines due to the antics of controversial Deputy Mayor Salim Mehajer, has challenged the decision of the NSW Local Government Minister to suspend its operation during a public inquiry.
The inquiry, announced last week, will examine allegations a number of Auburn councillors misused their positions to obtain significant planning outcomes for themselves, associated companies, friends, relatives or other councillors.
Local Government Minister Paul Toole said the council would need to make a convincing argument to avoid being suspended.
The council said it welcomed the public inquiry, after raising the matter at a meeting originally organised to discuss a submission to the Boundaries Commission regarding proposed council amalgamations.
But Salim Mehajer argued to ask the Minster for an extension of time for council to make its submission, and for more details on the allegations against the council.
Afterwards, Mr Mehajer said the way that the media had covered Auburn Council made the meeting necessary.
"The message the media and selected councillors have portrayed onto Auburn Council have left the Minister no choice but to undertake this inquiry," he told the ABC.
"If I was in his shoes I'll [sic] do the same."
"I am sure that the Minister Paul Toole will not suspend the entire council," Mr Mehajer said.
Mr Toole has said he would suspend councillors for the duration of the inquiry unless the council could put forward a convincing case against the move within the next 14 day.
The council is also one of several NSW councils facing amalgamation.
If the council is stood down, and is amalgamated, Wednesday's meeting will have been the last in its 68-year history.
It's cruel to suspend the 'poor four': councillor
Councillor Irene Simms told 702 ABC Sydney that Mr Toole had every right to suspend the council, but she hoped he realised that not all the councillors were the same.
"It seems cruel to suspend the four councillors who have fought tooth and nail to stop what we've perceived as the favouritism and self-serving," Cr Simms said.
"Given all the media coverage there's no question of who they [are], [they've] been clearly divided in the media to the 'super six and the poor four', there's no blurred lines here, it's them or it's us.
"We're asking for the council to remain and saying we'll be on our best behaviour.
"I fully support the investigation.
"The 'poor four' as Salim called us, we actually put it on the agenda that we should write to the Minister and ask for an inquiry."
She said her faction of councillors objected to a number of planning issues.
"A lot of these planning proposals are councillor-driven, not driven by an applicant in the community," Cr Simms said.
"But we've been very public about how this is wrong.
"The suspension may well run into the amalgamation issue and then it's just a very sad ending to Auburn Council."
Mr Mehajer said he supported the inquiry.
"Any wrongdoings by a particular councillor or member of the council staff should be sacked immediately as the council and greater community should not suffer due to a consequence of other members' poorly guided actions," Cr Mehajer said.
A spokesman for Mr Toole told the ABC that Auburn Council had a 14-day period to present a case to the Minister as to why it was in the public interest they are not suspended, after which the Minister will respond.
"The act only allows for the suspension of the full council and not individual councillors," he said.
North Sydney Council will also be subject to a public inquiry after allegations of conflict and dysfunction.
Mr Toole said the inquiry followed the repeated failure of North Sydney councillors to address serious performance issues resulting from the poor relationship between them.
However, unlike Auburn Council, there are no plans to suspend North Sydney Council during the inquiry.
Topics: local-government, government-and-politics, state-parliament, parliament, auburn-2144, nsw, australia, north-sydney-2060
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Drought pushes Australian wildlife into crowded care
Updated
North Queensland wildlife carers are overrun with animals in care as drought conditions continue over much of the state.
North Queensland Wildlife Care's Jenny Hayden has been a carer for more than a decade and said it was the worst dry spell the group had seen.
"It has just been dry for so long. We haven't had a good wet season really since Cyclone Yasi, so since then it has just been getting worse and worse," she said.
The group would normally attend about 500 macropods (kangaroos and wallabies) each year, but last year the number was more than 800.
"There was one week in August where I was called out to 24 rescues in one week," Ms Hayden said.
We were getting... underweight, malnourished babies often with badly broken bones which doesn’t usually happen, they are usually protected in the pouch Jenny Hayden, wildlife carer
"I had a little meltdown that weekend because there was so much death and just awful injuries.
"One that sticks in my head was this beautiful big adult male wallaby, he had been attacked by a dog and then hit by a car and he was still alive, so that was awful, his injuries were horrific."
Macropods are often in care for up to two years and carers cannot release them until the animal is developmentally ready to survive alone, and environmental conditions will sustain their survival.
Meanwhile, animals are continually coming in to care.
"So that is why I ended up with a bottleneck of animals that then I couldn't release until we got some rain," Ms Hayden said.
"I have still got quite a few that are big enough to go, but conditions aren't quite right."
Skinny, broken babies coming into care
In times of drought, wildlife move into developed areas to find grass and water, which makes them more susceptible to car strikes and dog attacks.
Last year carers were also seeing for the first time undernourished pinkies (baby macropods) and babies with broken bones.
"We were getting babies in that were skinny, which we had never seen before," Ms Hayden said.
"Underweight, malnourished babies often with badly broken bones, which doesn't usually happen. They are usually protected in the pouch.
"So all we put it down to was nutritional deficiencies in the mother so the bones weren't as strong in the babies."
The cost of caring
In addition to the increased financial and time pressure on carers, the emotional toll of constant caring has left many carers exhausted.
Ms Hayden said the group was constantly fundraising to try to meet increased costs, which is another commitment for their already time-poor members.
"Everyone is tired, we are all tired and unless we get decent rain I can't see that improving," she said.
Recent isolated rainfall has slowed the numbers of animals coming into care, which has brought some optimism to the group.
"We all pray for rain and we will all ring each other when it rains, 'It is raining at my house', because you know it means grass," Ms Hayden said.
The nature of intervention
Ms Hayden admitted that the numbers of animals they rescued or rehabilitated each year was probably insignificant considering the vast numbers that died during drought.
However, she said their work was "admirable" and had conservation value.
"Everyone says there is millions, there is millions, but one day there won't be," Ms Hayden said.
"So we need to do what we can to try and save the species now and to learn too — learn how to save the more vulnerable ones."
Topics: drought, weather, animals, endangered-and-protected-species, community-organisations, conservation, townsville-4810
First posted
Men's Shed movement contributing to tourism in regional Queensland
Posted
A Queensland council says having Men's Sheds in their towns is encouraging tourists to stay longer and spend more.
North Burnett Mayor Don Waugh said the volunteer organisation that brought men together to build and woodwork had recently established branches in Gayndah, Biggenden and Monto.
"Travellers who come through might pull up and overnight, or pull up for a couple of days, if they know there is a Men's Shed," he said.
"I understand that they have even been known to stay for a week, just to go along and build something while they are here."
The network of Men's Sheds across Australia is proving a valuable resource connecting tourists with North Burnett communities, and encouraging visitors to stay longer and contribute to the towns they visit.
Cr Waugh said of the men involved in the North Burnett Men's Shed, some were retired and some were near retirement, but all were looking at doing something for the community.
"The big thing of it is that they will be working for the community and will be working to enhance the service that is available through that operation," he said.
The Australian Men's Shed Association (AMSA) provides the location and contact details of more than 930 Men's Sheds throughout Australia.
Travellers are able to use this network to reach out to specific Men's Sheds and get involved when visiting a town, enabling men to connect with a community, a service and individuals whilst travelling.
According to the AMSA, all Men's Sheds are different, but they are important places to bring men from all walks of life together so they can make or learn alongside others, and contribute to their communities.
Topics: mens-health, travel-and-tourism, regional, gayndah-4625, biggenden-4621, monto-4630, bundaberg-4670
The current section of the Plenty highway being worked on was already sealed to a lesser standard
Posted
The current section of the Plenty Highway being upgraded was already sealed to a lesser standard.
Topics: rural, road-transport, livestock, agribusiness, alice-springs-0870
Inside Kabul's Intercontinental Hotel, the Wes Anderson-style icon restored to its former glory
Updated
In 2006, on his first day as president of Kabul's crumbling Intercontinental Hotel, Mohammad Sarwari was escorted to his filthy basement office.
He sat down on a dirty chair and the hotel staff filed in, applauded his arrival, and left.
Alone, Mr Sarwari, an Afghan-Australian then in his fifties and recently returned to his country of birth, took in the layers of grime and the lurid yellow, red and black décor.
"What is this place?" he asked himself.
In Kabul's recent history, few things have been as constant as the government-owned Intercontinental.
Afghanistan's first five-star hotel has been a dominant feature of the capital since 1969; a 200-room symbol of luxury, high on a hill, overlooking the cacophony below.
In its first heady years, before the country lurched from coups into decades of war, it hosted hedonistic disco parties and rooms overflowed with foreign tourists exploring a peaceful country.
Hotel neglected under Soviet occupation of Afghanistan
Like much of Kabul, the hotel was neglected during the Soviet occupation, decayed during the civil war and rotted to the core under the Taliban.
By the time that rogue regime were chased out in 2001, only a small band of journalists, contractors and spies braved the derelict accommodation.
Today, still under Mr Sarwari's exacting management, the Intercontinental has been largely restored.
It is a little faded in its grandeur, dated but elegant with marble and gilded walls, red velvet curtains and sparkling chandeliers.
It is also quiet.
After decades of war, very few guests check in. Looking around, you cannot help but think it is Kabul's own version of the Grand Budapest Hotel, made famous by Wes Anderson's eponymous movie.
And equally, it is filled with characters such as the moustachioed, charming banquet manager Mohammad Ebrahim Zahedi, who has worked here since its beginning, along with Naser Ali, the amiable pastry chef who walks with a limp.
With no hotel experience, Mr Sarwari was astonished to be appointed president.
After returning to Afghanistan in 2004, he set up a private bank and joined then-president Hamid Karzai's re-election team.
He admits he expected a government post with more clout.
Mr Sarwari first served Afghanistan as a diplomat in Moscow during the Soviet occupation in the 1980's.
He would listen to BBC dispatches detailing the daily bloodshed.
"It was always very sad news from Kabul," he said. "Our country was burning."
When the Taliban took power in 1996, he decided he could no longer represent nor return to his country.
After a week's holiday in Sydney, at the suggestion of an Australian diplomat friend, Mr Sarwari and his wife decided to start a new life.
Attempt at the quiet life in Brisbane
Together with their three young children, they settled in a small flat in Indooroopilly, Queensland.
In 1997, Mr Sarwari found obtaining a refugee visa in Australia straightforward.
Within seven months, the family received permanent residency and were granted citizenship two months later.
While his children adjusted quickly to their new life, the former diplomat found it more difficult — his English was limited and his degree was not recognised.
But life slowly improved.
He opened a successful import business and made friends.
"In Australia, you can get in your car and drive to Brisbane, the Sunshine Coast, Bondi Beach," he said.
"When there is war, where can you go?"
In 2004, a friend implored him to come back to Afghanistan.
Guests would laugh or cry
Mr Sarwari was shocked at the state of his country. There were constant blackouts and hot water was a luxury.
Still, he did not doubt that his future was in Afghanistan, not Australia.
"Australia is a fantastic country, very beautiful, very safe," he said.
"But this is my home ... it's my obligation to work for Afghanistan."
In 2006, the Intercontinental was in such a state that guests would either laugh or cry when shown their rooms, Mr Sarwari said.
He threw himself into the task of cleaning up the establishment, personally showing staff how to properly polish teapots.
Within a few years, the hotel buzzed again with foreign guests, important conferences and wedding parties.
Taliban gunfight at hotel
But the good times ended abruptly on June 28, 2011, when Taliban fighters stormed the building, as guests enjoyed the warm summer evening at an alfresco party.
Mr Sarwari, who had left just 10 minutes before, watched helplessly from afar as the iconic hotel on the hill was set ablaze and Taliban fighters traded gunfire with NATO helicopters.
Twelve people were murdered in the attack, including guests and hotel staff. Nine Taliban members were killed.
Today, a large security contingent protect the Intercontinental.
"Six years ago we had around 60 police for security," Mr Sarwari said. "Now it's 140. Twenty years ago we didn't even have one."
Mr Sarwari has not returned to Australia since he left in 2004.
He is acutely aware that many Afghans are desperate to move to Australia.
"There are no jobs, no security, no housing; the government is not taking care of them," he said.
"What else can they do?'
He remains grateful to Australia for giving him and his family a chance.
"I will never forget that," he said. But he added: "I want to work for this country ... it's not lovely, it's dirty and unsafe. But this is my home. I love it."
Topics: tourism, travel-and-tourism, unrest-conflict-and-war, terrorism, human-interest, afghanistan, sydney-2000, brisbane-4000
First posted
Australia's largest open-cut zinc mine ships final load from Karumba amid questions on legacy of landmark native title agreement
Updated
The legacy of a landmark native title agreement in far north-west Queensland is in question as Australia's largest open-cut zinc mine comes to a close.
Mining company MMG this week exported its final shipment of zinc concentrate from Karumba, marking the end of production at Century Mine, one of the world's largest zinc and lead deposits.
MMG has owned Century since 2009 and points to its record in employing Indigenous residents who, at peak production, accounted for about 20 per cent of the 900-strong workforce.
But despite the hundreds of jobs created by the mine, the broader goals of the long-standing Gulf Communities Agreement (GCA) remain aspirations.
Century Mine: facts and figures Australia's largest open-cut zinc mine
Located at Lawn Hill, 1,000km west of Townsville, 250km north-west of Mt Isa
Mining operations began in 1999, final ore extracted September 6, 2015
Employed 900 workers at peak production
Zinc and lead concentrates transported to Karumba Port via 305km pipeline
11 per cent of the 23,000ha Lawn Hill mining lease has been disturbed by mining activity
Pit size is 1.4km by 2.5km to a depth of 365m Source: MMG, Century Mine
Source: MMG, Century Mine
The historic deal was signed in 1997 between four native title groups — the Waanyi, Mingginda, Gkuthaarn and Kukatj — along with the then-owners of Century Mine, Pasminco, and the Queensland Government..
Extending beyond the usual parameters of ore-for-royalty payments, it provided a plan to drive social and economic development for Indigenous people living in Doomadgee, Normanton, Karumba, Mornington Island and surrounding country.
MMG's head of stakeholder relations Ted Woodruff acknowledged lessons needed to be learnt from the experience.
"This was an agreement written a long time ago. I think it would be written differently in today's world," Mr Woodruff said.
"A lot of the aspirations and expectations of the GCA probably weren't met as they were intended at the time.
"That's not necessarily through the fault of anyone, I just think it was an agreement written at a different time."
Benefits outweigh negatives, Mayor says
Carpentaria Mayor Fred Pascoe agreed negotiations might have been done differently but overall, the benefits of the GCA had far outweighed any negatives.
"The GCA was the mining company's 'license to operate'," Cr Pascoe said.
"And I think the fact the mining company changed hands so many times so quickly certainly didn't help, because every time we had a senior management team come in, people like myself and Bull Yanner used to say, 'We gotta break 'em all in again' to get the attitude and get the thinking straight."
Under the GCA, native title groups received more than $13 million in compensation during the life of the mine.
Mr Woodruff admitted "relationships [with native title groups] have been tested" in recent years, but reaffirmed MMG's commitment to working with all parties to the agreement.
"I know some eligible bodies feel that with Century coming to a close they perhaps haven't got the most out of compensation payments," he said.
"The eligible bodies, in fact, have complete autonomy of how they use that money."
He also pointed to the $15 million contributed to the Aboriginal Development Benefits Trust, a group responsible for fostering and supporting Indigenous business, as a key achievement.
"That's been a great success in our opinion and that will continue well beyond the life of MMG Century."
MV Wunma ships out for final time
At the height of production, about 120 employees worked in the port of Karumba where up to 40,000 tons of zinc concentrate was kept in a massive shed, after being processed from the raw material sent through a 300mm pipeline from the mine site, 305km away at Lawn Hill.
If there was cyclone coming to Karumba and I couldn't get out of town, this is where I'd be. It will not move. Ross Byers, MMG port manager Ross Byers on board the MV Wunma
Once the concentrate was thickened, filtered and put through a massive tumble drier, it came out as 10-12mm pellets, ready to be dispatched via the 110m transfer vessel, the MV Wunma.
It was loaded at a rate of 4700 tons every 24 hours, to export boats waiting in deeper waters about 40km offshore.
As the final shipment was loaded in Karumba today, MMG port manager Ross Byers reflected on the conditions in which his team had performed.
"(The heat) is debilitating, typically around February-March, we get the worst weather, the heat and the humidity and the rain events," Mr Byers said.
"If there's a tropical low or cyclone in the Gulf, there's a contingency zone where we will enact the contingency plan so tied up at the wharf, additional mooring lines are to be utilised, and typically the Marine Safety Queensland harbour master will close the port of Karumba.
"If there was cyclone coming to Karumba and I couldn't get out of town, this is where I'd be. It will not move."
The Karumba workforce will continue carrying out an extensive cleaning program until April-May, after which it will be wound back to a skeleton crew.
Mine jobs, but welfare dependency still an issue
Mr Woodruff said Century Mine had employed about 1,000 people from the lower Gulf, with many entering mainstream employment for the first time.
But social researchers showed the mine's development had failed to reduce rates of welfare dependency in the region.
Dr Jo-Anne Everingham from the Centre for Social Responsibility in Mining at the University of Queensland, one of the authors of the 15-year review of the GCA, said it highlighted the challenges of achieving long-term change.
"To think that the presence of one mine would somehow be able to do that in a very remote area was so ambitious that it's inevitable some people feel disappointed it didn't actually come to fruition," Dr Everingham said.
"A lot of the people who got jobs, and incomes they would never have otherwisse aspired to, moved their families to the major coastal centres.
"Then the Gulf communities felt that 'our level of human capital isn't being lifted, our standards of living aren't being lifted' because the people with the money have now moved.
"Not that of all them did, but there was that sort of effect that made it a mixed blessing."
It is an effect the GCA review warned would be amplified by the mine's closure.
ABC Rural contacted Gulf region Indigenous communities for comment.
What's next for Century Mine?
In 2012, MMG reported spending $42 million in the lower Gulf on goods and services, including $8.8 million in wages to employees living in the area.
Post-production will be a different story.
Century's workforce will drop to fewer than 100 employees, with most involved in mine rehabilitation and running the Lawn Hill Riversleigh Pastoral Company, which is managed by native title holders.
"There most certainly will be jobs about but we're not talking significant jobs, and I think we've made that clear to native title groups and all people of the lower Gulf," Mr Woodruff said.
"End of project or relinquishment is expected to be 30 years. While there won't be heaps of jobs available, there will certainly be jobs and it will be over a long period of time."
Once Century Zinc close shop completely, if they do, that'll obviously have a big impact on our rates base. Fred Pascoe, Carpentaria Shire Mayor
The loss of the region's largest ratepayer and private employer is a challenge for which Carpentaria Shire Council Mayor Fred Pascoe and his community have been bracing for several years.
Cr Pascoe said some skilled workers had been absorbed by the council and local cattle stations, but the mine's closure had coincided with significant downturns in the beef cattle, fishing and mining sectors.
"Once they close shop completely, if they do, that'll obviously have a big impact on our rates base," Cr Pascoe said.
"Hopefully if we get a decent wet season on the land, that'll turn things around on the sea.
"Tourism is still very much an emerging industry, I believe.
"It's certainly a major industry but the main market, if you like, is the grey nomad market, so as a shire and as a region we've got to facilitate trying to attract other types of tourism here."
Government applauds 'hallmark project'
Queensland Natural Resources and Mines Minister Anthony Lynham said he was "very sad" to see the mine close.
"It's been a hallmark project for Queensland," Dr Lynham said.
"It's well known, not only in Queensland and Australia but around the world, for the employment opportunities it gave to Indigenous people in the area."
Dr Lynham remained hopeful new mining projects in the state's north-west would soon come online, including MMG's proposed Dugald River development near Cloncurry, to offer more jobs.
"We are well aware we have to assist to provide employment opportunities in that region," he said
"Jobs and employment is what this Government is about, and dear to everyone's heart in this Government is Indigenous employment.
"We want to see communities off welfare, having jobs, proud of their employment, proud of their communities and proud of their heritage."
Dr Lynham was satisfied with the outcomes, but said he was willing to "sit and listen and consult" with native title groups about any concerns they held as the mine entered its rehabilitation phase.
He remained open to establishing a "transition taskforce", as was recommended in the 15-year review of the GCA but not acted on.
Topics: mining-rural, native-title, mining-industry, community-development, karumba-4891, mount-isa-4825
First posted
Brandon John Mischewski sought by police following suspicious Sunshine Coast death
Posted
Detectives looking into the suspicious death of a man on the Sunshine Coast in Queensland have released an image of a man they hope can assist with their investigations.
Mount Coolum man Scott Frank Williams, 33, was found dead inside a Buddina unit about 1:40pm on Sunday.
Investigators would like to speak with Brandon John Mischewski, 39, as part of their inquiries.
It is believed he may currently be travelling with a 32-year-old woman.
He is Caucasian, about 183 centimetres tall with a fair complexion and hazel eyes.
Anyone with information about his whereabouts is urged not to approach him but to contact police.
Detectives are also urging anyone with information on the case to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Topics: law-crime-and-justice, buddina-4575
Three injured in Paradise Interchange bus crash
Updated
A bus driver had to be cut free from his vehicle and two passengers were treated for minor injuries after two buses collided at the Paradise Interchange in Adelaide's north-east.
The crash happened when a bus coming off the O-Bahn crashed into the back of another about 9:00am.
Rescue crews said one bus driver who was trapped in the wreckage was freed by unbolting his entire seat.
He and two passengers from the other bus were taken to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Alan Fisk from the Metropolitan Fire Service said the driver was lucky not to be more seriously injured.
"It was quite a lengthy operation and we were concerned about his welfare, spinal injuries and possible neck injuries as well, so we tried to keep him in alignment," Mr Fisk said.
"What we ended up doing was actually unbolting the seat from the floor and taking him out of the bus through the doorway still seated in the chair.
"I don't know what speed they were travelling at, we haven't got any indication as to that, but certainly [there was] a lot of force in the impact, a lot of damage to the front of the buses."
Resident Bob Moule was working in his backyard at the time of the collision.
"There was what appeared to be an explosion, it was very much like a gas bottle or something like that," he said.
Mr Moule said he checked everything was okay at his neighbour's before going to the interchange to see if there had been a crash.
When he arrived he saw the two buses.
"It was a bit emotional, you can't help but feel empathetic to the people that are involved and the driver," he said.
The Paradise Interchange was closed, but has since been reopened.
Topics: accidents, accidents---other, paradise-5075, adelaide-5000, sa
First posted
Man charged over six-hour siege at Maroubra unit in Sydney's east
Posted
A man has been charged following a six-hour siege at a public housing unit complex at Maroubra in Sydney's east yesterday.
Police were called to the unit block on Portland Crescent by a member of the public about 10:40am where officers said two men had barricaded themselves inside a unit.
Police believed one of the men had a firearm and a replica gun was found inside the unit after the incident ended about 4:00pm.
Two men left the home after negotiations with the police.
One of the men was tasered after police said he failed to "comply with police instructions".
He was treated by paramedics at the scene.
Two men, aged 29 and 31, were arrested and taken to Maroubra Police Station.
Detective Superintendent Gavin Dengate said one of the men was charged with nine offences, refused bail and was expected to face Waverly Local Court today.
"A 29-year-old male from the Eastern Beaches area of Sydney has been charged with a number of offences relating to aggravated break and enter, possession of firearms and other related offences," he said.
The man was also charged with taking or detaining a person with intent to obtain advantage and larceny.
The 31-year-old man was released without charge.
"The other male in the residence has been interviewed by police and investigations into his involvement are still continuing," Detective Superintendent Dengate said.
"No charges at this stage have been laid in relation to that person."
Detective Superintendent Dengate said the pair "know each other well".
"We would call it a barricade, not a hostage [situation] at this stage," he said.
"The doors were locked. They certainly were not allowing police into the residence.
"The fact that it will be alleged by police that a firearm was sighted was the reason why public safety was paramount, and police conducted negotiations for some time, to ensure the resolution was as peaceful as possible."
The community was thanked by police for their patience during the alleged siege.
Topics: crime, courts-and-trials, maroubra-2035
Darryl South says myrtle rust has caused issues for his business
Posted
Matt Brann speaks to Darryl South from Darwin Plant Wholesalers. Although myrtle rust has not infected any of his plants, its presence in the Northern Territory has hurt his business. READ MORE.
Source: ABC Rural | Duration: 5min 58sec
Topics: rural, darwin-0800
Australian Open: Andy Murray beats David Ferrer to progress to semi-finals at Melbourne Park
Updated
Andy Murray was effective in the open air and devastating after the Rod Laver Arena roof was closed as he stormed into the Australian Open semi-finals on Wednesday with a four-set win over David Ferrer.
The pair split the opening two sets of their quarter-final and Murray had just broken for a 3-1 lead in the third when organisers delayed the match to shut the roof with a heavy storm approaching from the west.
The eighth-seeded Ferrer was visibly upset with the decision, which played into Murray's hands.
He broke the Spaniard again to claim the third set and went on to win 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 6-3 in three hours and 20 minutes and book a semi-final on Friday night against either number 13 seed Milos Raonic from Canada or number 23 Gael Monfils from France.
"I found it a bit easier to return [after the roof was closed]," said Murray.
"It was a bit windy at the beginning of the match and he's extremely accurate with his returns.
"It's tough in those situations. Ideally I'd have played that next game and then held and then we'd have had the break.
"But I like playing indoors. I grew up in Scotland, the weather is not quite like here."
The second-seeded Murray has now reached the last four at five of the past six Australian Opens, but has yet to win the title.
The Scot has beaten Ferrer in four of their five clashes at grand slam level.
The Spaniard came into the latest encounter as the only man yet to drop a set at Melbourne Park this year.
That record lasted all of one set, with Murray breaking in the fourth game and saving two break back points in the ninth game before going on to clinch it 6-3.
But the Spanish ironman was never going to go away quietly, playing the big points better in the tie-break to level at one set all.
The final two sets were largely one-way traffic - outdoors and then indoors.
Ferrer's scalps en route to the last eight included Lleyton Hewitt, whose decorated 20-year professional career came to a halt with a straight-sets demise in the second round.
AAP
Topics: australian-open, tennis, sport, melbourne-3000
First posted
Geelong weather: 18 people rescued in 'one-in-50-year' flash flooding
Updated
Cars have been submerged, 18 people rescued and buildings damaged during flash flooding in Geelong after a severe storm unleashed a huge downpour, before moving towards Melbourne.
The amount of rain dumped on Geelong during the Wednesday afternoon thunderstorm was a one-in-50-year event, the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) said.
The State Emergency Service (SES) said it had received 486 calls since 4:45pm on Wednesday, mainly from people in Geelong.
"We've had 188 on the flooding side of things, and that will include cars stuck in water, flooding through homes, and that'll also include roofs leaking," the SES's Steve Cattell said.
"Probably the most concerning one is we've had 18 calls to rescue people out of floodwaters.
"Unfortunately in the situation with fast-flowing water some of them may have been caught in car parks … but I think they're all safe now, we're just working through all the jobs and getting them cleared as quickly as we can."
The Geelong Hospital, local roads and the rail line were affected by the storm, the SES said.
BoM senior forecaster Rod Dickson said Geelong and Avalon got more than a month's worth of rain in the downpour.
"Geelong recorded 42.4mm in that severe thunderstorm, equivalent to a one-in-50-year event, and almost double it's January average rainfall in about an hour," he said.
"Avalon even topped that, as the storm moved through there, they're up to 72mm, 54mm of that in 30 minutes, a staggering rainfall event there, one-in-100-year event."
VicRoads spokesman Steve Bean said a number of cars had to be fished out of floodwaters on Ballarat Road in North Geelong.
"Unfortunately I think they were driving when they shouldn't have been, they've headed into some water which I think they may have felt was safe, which was not," he said.
Storms warnings current, as conditions ease in Melbourne
The BoM issued severe thunderstorm warnings for parts of Melbourne and regional Victoria, though conditions in the capital eased by Wednesday evening.
"The immediate threat of severe thunderstorms has passed, but the situation will continue to be monitored and further warnings will be issued if necessary," the BoM said.
A severe thunderstorm warning was also cancelled for northern parts of the state.
Mr Dickson said the showers and thunderstorms would continue in Victoria on Thursday.
"Once again with further heavy falls possible and thunderstorms, although this time more likely over eastern suburbs than the west," he said.
Earlier, callers to 774 ABC Melbourne said the weather had caused havoc on the Princes Freeway Geelong-bound.
"There were a few [cars] pushed up against the retaining wall, and a few just abandoned on both sides of the road," he said.
Geelong Hospital's emergency department has also received flood damage, Barwon Health said.
"The University Hospital Geelong site has several minor leaks affecting the Emergency Department staff change rooms, tea room and education room," a spokesperson for Barwon Health said in a statement.
"The Belmont Community Health Centre has been closed due to water damage.
"The McKellar Centre Cafe 45 has been closed due to water damage."
Barwon Health said no patients or residents were affected.

The SES advised that rainfall run-off into waterways in recent fire-affected areas along the Great Ocean Road may contain debris such as soil, ash, trees and rocks.
"People in fire-affected areas should also be alert to the potential for landslides and debris across roads," the SES said.
Meanwhile, the Environment Protection Authority (EPA) said an oil sheen has been reported in Geelong's Corio Bay and shoreline near the Viva refinery.
The EPA said it was investigating and had urged people to avoid swimming in the area until further notice.
It is unclear whether the reported sheen is related to the storm event.
Topics: storm-event, weather, geelong-3220
First posted
Cyclone warning for north-west WA issued after El Nino delays season
Updated
A cyclone warning has been issued for people in parts of Western Australia's Kimberley and Pilbara, with gale force winds predicted.
The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) has forecast the first cyclone of the season after El Nino caused hotter and drier than average conditions.
The BoM has issuing a tropical cyclone advisory declaring a watch zone from Cape Leveque to Mardie, including Broome, Wallal, Port Hedland, Dampier and Karratha.
BoM's Neil Bennett said the bureau was watching a tropical low 660km north-west of Broome for signs of a developing cyclone.
"Certainly one possibility is the development into a full-blown tropical cyclone," Mr Bennett told Vanessa Mills on ABC Kimberley Local Radio.
Mr Bennett emphasised it was too early to be sure if a cyclone would develop.
"It may just bring periods of strong winds and heavy rain, so that's the range of scenarios that we're looking at," he said.
With the developing system expected to move south towards the east Pilbara and west Kimberley coast over the next 48 hours, if a cyclone does form, it is not anticipated to be able to develop to a severe intensity.
"Current thinking is if that happens, it's got such a small period of time for it to form, that we don't anticipate that that would end up being a category three or above," Mr Bennett said.
The BoM's advisory warns that even if a cyclone does not develop, strong to gale force winds are likely near the centre and to the north of the system.
El Nino delays cyclone season
With few exceptions, north-west Australia has experienced a hot and dry start to the wet season, which Mr Bennett said had been caused by the El Nino event in the Pacific Ocean.
"The suppression of tropical activity due to the influence of the El Nino conditions in the eastern Pacific, that's the main influence," he said.
"The first week of January saw some really hot stuff.
"Places like Fitzroy Crossing ... had a temperature, a new January record, of 44.8, and Halls Creek had a new January record on the same day of 44.9."
But Mr Bennett said the Madden-Julian oscillation was overcoming El Nino's hot and dry influence.
"It's essentially a wave of enhanced convection that moves around the globe, running from west to east," he said.
"The potential then increases for tropical lows or even a tropical cyclone, and that's what we're anticipating as we move into the back end of this week."
Mr Bennett said that despite the late start to the cyclone season, Pilbara and Kimberley residents needed to remain vigilant.
"[Last year] was a non-El Nino year and we didn't see our first land-falling cyclone until March, so we're still in the cyclone season," he said.
"I think it's worth just checking that you've got all the equipment that you need, and just making sure you've got your cyclone plan in place."
Topics: cyclone, rainfall, broome-6725, port-hedland-6721
First posted
Svetlana Micic and John Moore from DAFWA with a smartphone clamped to a header wheel.
Posted
Svetlana Micic and John Moore from DAFWA with a smartphone clamped to a header wheel.
Topics: computers-and-technology, pest-management, albany-6330
Handwritten note at the Box Village Bakery in Sylvania
Posted
Ross Paull left a handwritten note at the Box Village Bakery at Sylvania in Sydney's south. The bakery has been closed after an apparent outbreak of food poisoning was linked to the bakery. January 26, 2016.
Topics: food-poisoning, food-safety, sylvania-2224
Slow Clothing Project: 40 garments in 40 weeks turns tide on fast fashion
Updated
Jane Milburn wants to turn the tide on fast, disposable fashion and spark a conversation about where clothes come from, by getting 40 people from across Australia to create 40 garments in 40 weeks.
Her Slow Clothing Project encourages both beginner and advanced "makers" — her new term for dressmakers — to reuse and rejuvenate old clothing, either from the wardrobe or an op shop, or from fabric that has lurked in the cupboard for years.
Ms Milburn said the project celebrated the creative wellbeing and sustainable benefits of sewing, and encouraged people to think about what they wore, and where it came from.
"When you have sewing skills, you can tweak hemlines, sleeves and necklines to give garments a fresh life," she said.
"It's only when you understand the skill involved in making something that you really appreciate a garment."
In order to practise real ethical, sustainable fashion — and not waste money — Ms Milburn said we should aim to buy clothing that we could wear at least 30 times.
"This keeps cost-per-wear down," she said.
With cheap, imported clothing readily available in shops these days, Ms Milburn said a lot of skills had been lost.
"There's a whole generation who missed out on learning to sew," she said.
"We've recognised that kids weren't learning to cook and now there's a focus on cooking programs.
"I see sewing as a similar life skill to cooking."
Fast fashion a 'race to the bottom on price'
Particularly with the Rana Plaza collapse in Bangladesh in 2013, Ms Milburn said the tide was turning against cheap, disposable fashion.
"That was a real window into the world of what fast fashion's about, which is the race to the bottom on price," she said.
The problem is a lot of poor-quality clothing is going to developing countries, which needs to be buried or disposed of in their country, and it's impacting on traditional textile industries and traditional dress with all the western clothing taking over. Jane Milburn, Slow Clothing Project
"People are being exploited, and you have to be sure that what you're buying doesn't have somebody's blood on it.
"People are on a search for meaning now, and the big word is 'quality' and a lot of fast fashion isn't quality because it's not really made to last — it's ephemeral."
Ms Milburn's background is in agricultural science and her interest in natural fibres stemmed from that work.
"Two-thirds of all new clothing is now made from synthetic fibres, which is a huge change that's happened in a decade — and that's in the decade of fast fashion," she said.
"Research shows synthetic fibres absorb bacteria more, they're hotter, and they feel awful."
With a mother who taught home economics and wrote a textbook on the subject, it is no surprise that Ms Milburn grew up making her own clothes.
But she also sees the value in up-cycling — altering clothing to give it a new lease on life — and not wasting money on fashion that does not last beyond a season.
"The whole thing [fast fashion] is about trading on our insecurities, and planned obsolescence," she said.
"There are more sustainable ways of dressing and also ways that give you connection to your garments, and gives you something that's individual."
70 million kilograms of cast-off clothing
While some people love a good trawl through op shops, Ms Milburn said a lot of people once considered op shopping for "poor people" but now it was for people who wanted to dress sustainably and thriftily.
But she said there was a down-side to giving clothes away.
"Every year Australia exports 70 million kilograms of cast-off clothing to the world, and we're just one of a number of developed nations who are doing that," she said.
"People send it off to the op shop and think 'Oh, that saves my conscience, I'm giving' but in a way, they'd be better off not buying the clothes in the first place and giving money [to charities]."
Ms Milburn said about 20 per cent of clothing donated to op shops would find a new owner locally, but the rest was used for rags, a lot of it was sent to landfill, and the rest was sold to developing nations for $1 a kilogram.
"The problem is a lot of poor-quality clothing is going to developing countries, which needs to be buried or disposed of in their country, and it's impacting on traditional textile industries and traditional dress with all the western clothing taking over," she said.
Slow clothing gathers speed
Ms Milburn has started the ball rolling with the project's first garment, while Julie Hillier is making the second piece.
"Julie's making a garment from her own pattern, which she uses a lot to teach people how to sew," Ms Milburn said.
"Then there's Annabelle Brayley, who's a writer and former nurse from Morven in south-west Queensland, who used to make wedding dresses.
"She lives on a property, so she's used to being resourceful."
Former ABC journalist and QCWA member Neroli Roocke is going to reclaim fabric from a vintage piece of clothing.
Sheep producer Cath Jarvis from Tottenham, near Dubbo in central-west NSW, is going to make something from her husband's King Gee trousers, that wear out at the knees.
She patches most of them but, for the Slow Clothing Project, she's going to turn one pair of trousers into a skirt.
"That's a real reclaim, re-salvage, re-fashion job," Ms Milburn said.
The idea for the Slow Clothing Project came about while Ms Milburn was working on another project two years ago.
"I wanted something that could involve a lot of people — part of it is re-fashion, also natural fibres, hand-made, and I'm hoping that by the range of people I've got involved we can see sewing as accessible," she said.
"It's not all that hard; the place to start is in the op shop and reclaiming clothes, change the sleeves, and you haven't lost a great deal.
"There will be someone around who would probably be prepared to teach you — you've just got to ask.
"If we don't capture the skills of the older generation, it's something that's going to be completely lost — except for the diehards."
The Slow Clothing Project will culminate in a fashion parade of the 40 garments in November, and Ms Milburn hoped to take the collection on a travelling exhibition around regional Australia.
"Each of the garments will have a story. I just hope it starts a conversation about alternative ways of dressing that aren't just racing out and buying the next thing," she said.
Ms Milburn wants makers from all around Australia to get involved by registering for the project.
Topics: sustainable-living, environmentally-sustainable-business, fashion, art-and-design, brisbane-4000
First posted
Fossil theft sparks fresh calls for Ulladulla Harbour to receive heritage listing
Updated
There is a renewed push for the Ulladulla Harbour on the New South Wales south coast to be heritage-listed, after a fossil was cut from rocks using an angle grinder.
Volunteers from the Gondwana Fossil Walks group noticed the 270-million-year-old fossil missing earlier in January.
Group president Phil Smart said he was baffled as to why someone would want to take the fossil.
"I was startled to see that someone with an angle grinder had been active again," Mr Smart said.
"This happened three years ago. A little square was cut out of the rock platform to remove a single fossil.
"This time, a similar-sized square, which has all of the hallmarks of the same operator, has been used to remove another fossil."
Mr Smart said the fossils were of little monetary value, but were significant in documenting biodiversity in the harbour over millions of years.
"We're not actually sure which fossil went the second time, but the one that was taken the first time, we're very familiar with it," he said.
"It was a pecten shell, of low quality. The resolution, the sharpness of the features was poor.
"It would fetch no more than $5 or so on eBay, if someone chose to sell it.
"The untouched Ulladulla platforms have real heritage status. The heritage value here is both educational and scientific."
Group needs help with heritage listing application
Gondwana Fossil Walks has applied for the area to be added to the National Heritage List.
The original proposal included a written letter of support from Dr Bruce Runnegar, director of NASA's Astrobiology Institute and professor in the University of California, Los Angeles' Department of Earth and Space Sciences and the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics.
"It wasn't rejected, our application, it was certainly looked at seriously and the panel said, 'We want more information about significant research that's been done on the rock platforms'," Mr Smart said.
"As a group of volunteers, we simply haven't had the time.
"We will ultimately get around to it. It would be nice if we got some support from someone from a university or somewhere, to give us a bit of help on that."
Ulladulla's Fossil House volunteer and manager Julian Sharrad believed having the area heritage-listed would provide greater protection against vandals.
"It would give better recognition that this is a significant site to come and have a look at," Mr Sharrad said.
"It would give us some protection from the people who would come and cut pieces out of the rock platform if there is a particularly nice specimen, and they want to keep it for themselves rather than leaving it for the tourists and everybody else, and other scientists who would come and study these rocks."
Anyone with information about theft of the fossil is being urged to contact the police, but Mr Smart said he would be happy to teach the culprit a lesson.
"Please come and see us. If you're really keen to add to your collection, or you're so desperate that you need a few fossils that you can sell, come and see me at the fossil house," Mr Smart said.
"I do have material that is spare, that is better than what you've picked up out of the rock platform, and I'd be happy to give it to you."
Topics: environmental-impact, crime, ulladulla-2539
First posted
Eric Arthur, Mount Gambier's man of community service, awarded OAM
Updated
In February 1954, Mount Gambier photographer Eric Arthur was assigned a special mission — to photograph the Queen.
With the knowledge that Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh were due to drive an open-topped car around the city's iconic Blue Lake during their visit to South Australia's south east, Mr Arthur staked out a high spot with his camera and hollered 'hello, hello!' to get the Monarch's attention.
"The Queen looked up at me and raised her hand up in a wave and I had the picture," he said.
The photograph became his most famous image, published in magazines and newspapers across the world.
The story is just one of many in the incredible life of 92-year-old Mr Arthur, who was awarded a Medal of the Order of Australia (OAM) on Tuesday.
Still living in his much-loved Blue Lake city, Mr Arthur recalled "a good life" growing up in Bay Road with his two brothers and three sisters during pre-war days.
His father Garnet was a well-known photographer with a local studio, and hoped for one of his sons to join him in the business.
Sadly, Mr Arthur's brother Colin was killed in Canada during World War II, but a duty to his country also called for Mr Arthur before he could grant his father's wish.
He enlisted with the Australian Army as an 18-year-old, but later transferred to the Royal Australian Air Force and flew 44 night time bombing missions across Europe with his two-man Mosquito.
Mr Arthur's squadron was a tight-knit crew of just 30 members, who all became quite close.
"We all knew one another. We knew who was missing and who didn't come back again after a night flight," he said.
While at war, the young navigator took a Duo-620 camera with him everywhere he went.
His pictures later provided a valuable history of the 627 Squadron.
A lady love enters the picture
Mr Arthur's time overseas brought a special person into his life — a young, beautiful brunette by the name of Evelyn who was to follow him home to Mount Gambier after his service ended.
When Evelyn arrived in Australia in 1948, Mr Arthur had joined his father's photography business, which was renamed the Arthur & Son Studio.
Post-war days was busy times for the family studio, Mr Arthur said, and everything that happened in town, "we photographed it".
Community service is so important — that's how to you get to meet people. Eric Arthur, Mount Gambier OAM recipient
Along with the standard fare of family wedding and new baby portraits, there were sporting events to attend, plenty of council work and press assignments for the city's newspaper The Border Watch.
It was the days before roll film, and the young photographer would have to load each sheet of black and white 5x4 film into the large format camera separately, and pray his subjects did not blink.
Work life aside, Mr Arthur was also responsible for kick-starting a rollicking social scene in the Blue Lake city with the development of a group simply known as The Manhattan Club, based on wild clubs and diners he had seen in New York.
"It was great times," he said. "Evelyn was coming out from Europe and I said the best way for her to get know people would be to get a group together and run our own dances."
Designed to "liven the place up post-war", the club's dances, cabaret nights and reverse debutante balls, where lads became ladies and vice versa, held at the city's Town Hall, became the talk of the town, immortalised by Mr Arthur and his camera.
Decades of community service
It was also about this time Mr Arthur began to get involved with the local Legacy club, kicking off service to the community that would span the next 60 years of his life.
Mr Arthur's service included work with local organisations such as Trees for Life, Meals on Wheels, and the Returned Services League, and he spent more than 50 years with the Rotary Club of Mount Gambier.
In 1954, inspired by fond childhood memories with the local Scouts, he also became the District Commissioner for Scouts.
During his time with Rotary, Mr Arthur was at the helm of many community projects, including building the city's first swimming pool, encouraging student exchange programs, building Blue Lake lookouts and setting up the Rotary market, which still operates today.
All this was while bringing up four children and designing and building a house, which the couple still lives in on Bay Road.
"Community service is so important — that's how to you get to meet people," he said.
"It takes a lot of time, but it's no trouble to do so."
After running the photography studio for 45 years, Mr Arthur retired in 1989, but his photographic legacy lived on.
In 2005, Mr Arthur donated the studio's entire collection of 6,500 photographs to the State Library of South Australia, essentially giving a gift of decades of the city's photographic history to the public.
Award comes as a surprise
In his early 80s, Mr Arthur began volunteering his time to a new organisation — the Boandik aged care facility.
Ironically, he was sometimes years older than many of the people he came to visit, but said he just wanted to "come and cheer people up".
Despite his many achievements, Mr Arthur said it was quite a surprise to be awarded the OAM.
"I never dreamed of this and I still haven't quite grasped it," he said, but could not resist a last joke.
"If you live long enough, you'll be given something or other."
Topics: history, community-and-society, mount-gambier-5290, sa
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Australia Day: Lucky Irish beginner takes out win at Brisbane's annual cockroach race
Updated
Hundreds have flocked to an inner Brisbane hotel for the 35th annual Australia Day cockroach race.
The tradition began after a bet between two friends at the Story Bridge Hotel.
It now raises money for charity.
Story Bridge Hotel owner Richard Deery said the event was typically Australian.
"It lets everyone become an owner, from the youngest to the oldest. They can all be an owner of a thoroughbred," Mr Deery said.
Punters can bring their own roach from home, or purchase one for $5.
The owners of the winning roach get a medallion, but the roach itself does not fare as well.
"They're short lived. There's too many feet around the track for them to live on," Mr Deery said.
Mark Alcorn's roach won the first of the day's 13 races.
The Irish citizen has been living in Australia and is now a permanent resident. It was his first roach race.
"As soon as I heard about it I said, 'I'm gonna go and I'm gonna win'," Mr Alcorn said.
"It's possibly the best day of my life".
Topics: australia-day, event, brisbane-4000, qld, australia
First posted
Body washes ashore on Sunshine Coast beach, near where teenager went missing
Updated
A body has washed ashore on a Queensland's Sunshine Coast, not far from where a man disappeared in rough surf last Sunday.
Beach campers reported the body about four kilometres north of Teewah, just north of Noosa, on Tuesday afternoon.
Police and ambulance officers were called to the scene.
A 19-year-old Brisbane man disappeared while swimming with a friend in rough surf at Teewah Beach on Sunday.
A search involving water police, Surf Life Saving Queensland (SLSQ) and rescue helicopters had failed to find any sign of the swimmer.
Beaches along the south-east Queensland coast were pummelled by powerful surf all weekend thanks to an ex-cyclone near Tonga.
At Caloundra, 74 people had to be rescued on Saturday.
Topics: disasters-and-accidents, death, noosa-heads-4567, qld, australia
First posted
Australian of the Year David Morrison with members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association Australia ACT branch at Australia Day celebrations in Canberra. (26 January 2016)
Posted
Australian of the Year David Morrison with members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association Australia ACT branch at Australia Day celebrations in Canberra.
Topics: community-and-society, religion-and-beliefs, canberra-2600, act
Australia vs India: Tourists win opening Twenty20 international in Adelaide as familiar faces surface
Updated
If Twenty20 is supposed to be for an infant generation and their short attention spans, it is interesting how often the format is the province of veterans.
Key points: Indian debutant, Hardik Pandya, came back from a horror first over with five individual wides to take two wickets
Virat Kohli scored more than half of India's runs from the bat, ending not out with 90 from 55 balls
Second game to be played in Melbourne on Friday
Some of the most prominent figures across the Big Bash League were the Hussey brothers, Jacques Kallis, the Brads - Hodge and Hogg. Ben Rohrer hit the final's winning runs.
Before the season's first Twenty20 international, in which India would easily beat Australia by 37 runs at Adelaide Oval, the TV cameras panned down the ranks of each squad as the national anthems played.
Faces scrolled by. Yuvraj Singh. Shaun Tait. Harbhajan Singh. Shane Watson.
Yuvraj, who as Australians enjoy recalling, once plundered Stuart Broad for a six from every ball of a Twenty20 over, but who was discarded with acrimony after his struggles helped Sri Lanka win the World Twenty20 final in 2014.
Tait, who last played for Australia in a 50-over World Cup loss in 2011, the match that convinced Ricky Ponting to resign the captaincy.
It's just so exciting to be back playing for Australia again, and on Australia Day in front of a big crowd - it doesn't get much better. Shane Watson
Harbhajan! Whose finest hour was the most epic of Test series in 2001, taking 32 wickets in five innings to chop off Australia after the longest winning streak in history. That was 15 years ago. Despite indifferent returns from occasional games in the last couple of years, here he was lining up for India still.
Mostly it did not go so well for these comeback ancients. Harbhajan was not picked. Yuvraj did not get a hit and bowled one over for 10. Tait bowled the kind of spell Tait was famous for, four overs for 45, though he should have had Rohit Sharma twice but for poor catching.
It was a better day for Watson, having retired from the Test team after being politely informed of the writing on the wall, then having been phased out of the national 50-over side.
Seeing him continue in one format, after a very good Big Bash League with bat and ball, put a smile on the faces of traditionalists who cannot imagine their cricket lives without him.
"It's just so exciting to be back playing for Australia again, and on Australia Day in front of a big crowd - it doesn't get much better," beamed Watson to ABC Grandstand on the night.
He bowled brilliantly to back up that selection, after Australia won the toss and chose to chase. Rohit had fired India to a fast start, 40 from the first four overs. It was not convincing: Kane Richardson dropped him over the rope at fine leg from Tait, then failed to get forward for the next chance, before Cameron Boyce dropped a top edge from James Faulkner.
But Watson came on to remove Rohit with his first ball, deceived into driving a cutter to mid-on, then had Shikhar Dhawan nick an uppercut against the slow bouncer the same over.
Until the last three balls of his allotment, India could not get Watson away, and even with two late boundaries from Virat Kohli, he ended with 2 for 24 in a score of 188.
For Kohli, it was a night of the undeniable sweetness of batting. He scored more than half of India's runs from the bat, ending not out with 90 from 55 balls.
At Adelaide Oval where he made twin tons in that memorable Test match in 2014, Kohli was immediately right back at home.
It was one of those sumptuous innings, typified by the two perfect drives from Watson in the 15th, one that beat Faulkner's dive at cover into the fence, one that mirrored it on the wagon wheel to split the men in the deep at midwicket.
Between those he square-drove Tait for four and flicked him off the pads for six, cover-drove Boyce over cover and long-off, and viciously cut and cover-drove Richardson to the shorter boundaries.
Suresh Raina provided quiet support, struggling early after having just arrived on the plane, before lifting his rate late to marshal 41 from 34. That just brought MS Dhoni in, who monstered Faulkner for a massive six and a four in his first two balls, and finished with 11 off 3.
After all the talk of Kohli centuries during the one-day international series, there was no interest from he or Dhoni in trying to get him a milestone in the last over, as the Indian captain maximised runs and the vice-captain ran hard in both directions at every opportunity.
Khawaja omission noticeable in Australia's defeat
Australia came out confident, with a big-hitting line-up including two Big Bash League stars in debutant Travis Head and fourth-gamer Chris Lynn. It did not include Usman Khawaja, however, which Australian fans began to lament as the innings fell apart like a bad pavlova.
Not that it started badly: Aaron Finch scored heavily early, taking 17 off Ravi Ashwin's first over and keeping Warner off strike for the first 12 balls. Warner began to time it beautifully when he got a chance, with two fours and a six, and Australia had 47 from the first five overs.
But Jasprit Bumrah, who so impressed in his one-day international debut last Sunday with 2 for 40, debuted as effectively in the Twenty20 format with 3 for 23. Warner was his first wicket, skewing the short ball to mid-on.
"Looked like Bumrah rushed him a little bit," explained South Australia batsman Callum Ferguson on Grandstand.
"He's been hurrying onto both Warner and Finch. It's an awkward action, that."
Smith and Finch carried on, but when both fell with the score on 89 things began to fall apart.
Finch in particular gave an interesting by-play, when Ashwin appealed for LBW but umpire Fry said the bowler had been standing in front of him and blocking his view. Ashwin ran in again, nailed Finch on the pad again, and got the decision.
Jadeja got Head the same way next over, Watson smashed one six before holing out for 12, Lynn hit one long ball onto the hill but gave up a catch on 17, and the innings fell away to 151 all out in the final over.
The other Indian debutant, Hardik Pandya, came back from a horror first over with five individual wides to take two wickets, Jadeja got 2 for 21 from his four, and Ashwin had 2 for 28, leaving the crowd in blue plenty to cheer ahead of the second game in Melbourne on Friday.
Importantly, Australia Day is also India's Republic Day, and January 26 may well be a more auspicious date for them to celebrate it.
With the Indian women's team recording a massive upset earlier that day, then the men's team doubling up, it was a red-letter day in Adelaide for the visiting nation, and a forgettable one for the hosts.
Topics: cricket, sport, adelaide-5000, sa, australia
First posted
Clive Palmer says he is not responsible for paying Queensland Nickel workers' entitlements
Posted
Clive Palmer says he is not personally responsible for paying out the entitlements of Queensland Nickel workers made redundant before the company went into voluntary administration.
The company, which donated more than $20 million to Palmer United Party, went into voluntary administration last week and the administrators have so far refused to pay the entitlements of the 237 workers laid off at the Yabulu refinery near Townsville.
Upon his election to federal parliament in 2013, Mr Palmer stepped down as director of the company and says he has only been in a supervising role since.
"When the workers were made redundant they were given two weeks' wages in advance, and then under the Fair Work act they were given a statement of their entitlements," he said.
"The administrator has decided not to pay their entitlements, not me ... [I] really had no control over it.
"I've put up $250 million of assets to support any arrangement that the administrator comes up with, but the administrator is the one that is in control."
"[I'm] no more [financially accountable] than the other thousand employees who approved things.
"This whole thing about worker entitlements is the biggest beat up in press history."
Topics: mining-rural, mining-industry, clive-palmer, work, townsville-4810, qld
Australia Day: First Syrian family as part of additional refugee intake 'thrilled' to be here
Updated
The youngest members of the Kujah family, the first Syrian family to be resettled in Australia as part of the Federal Government's additional 12,000 humanitarian intake, are already clear on how they want to celebrate Australia Day.
Ahmed, 3, clutches a balloon animal and gazes, entranced, at the performers and displays at a small community barbeque in suburban Perth, before plunging into the children's play area, all smiles.
The Kujahs want their adopted country to know just how grateful they are to be offered a chance at a better life, far from the war-torn city of Homs they have fled.
Father Bashar Kujah, through a translator, said the initial shock of arrival was gone.
"They are very happy, they found a great country, the people here are very nice as well, very welcoming," the translator said.
Mr Kujah is a butcher, and has reportedly been offered a job working at Harvey Beef by owner, Australian mining magnate Andrew Forrest.
He said he also hoped to bring other family members to Australia, who remain stranded in the Syrian conflict.
Khawlah Kujah, who has just given birth to their youngest child Mohammad two months ago, said she was thrilled he had the chance to be born an Australian citizen.
She said the family would now focus on learning English and getting a good education for their children.
A case worker for the family said they planned to seek Australian citizenship once eligible.
Resettlement process slow but 'gaining pace'
The family are among just over 20 refugees who have been brought to Australia under the Federal Government's additional 12,000 intake of refugees fleeing the destruction and devastation of the war which has raged across Syria and Iraq.
Thousands more will come, they will be welcome in Australia and they will become Australians. WA Premier Colin Barnett
Federal Social Services Minister Christian Porter said the process had been slow, as rigorous security checks and sponsorships were required.
He said while he expected the process to gain pace over the next few months, it would take longer than 12 months.
WA Premier Colin Barnett said he looked forward to welcoming more refugees as they arrived.
"Thousands more will come, they will be welcome in Australia and they will become Australians," he said.
"One of the great things about our country, in the post-war periods, in the second war, over four-and-a-half million have come to Australia and now call Australia home.
"I hope they continue to come, and that we provide care, safety and these young children grow up to be great young Australians, keeping their heritage and their tradition, a part of our Australian community."
Topics: refugees, australia-day, perth-6000
First posted
Rob Pyne: Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk calls for calm as Cairns MP continues to contemplate future
Updated
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has urged "calm", as speculation mounts about the future of her Cairns MP, Rob Pyne.
Mr Pyne quit the left faction of the ALP (Australian Labor Party) yesterday, saying it was "left in name only".
When asked by the ABC on Monday whether he intended to quit the party, he said "no".
"Certainly, it is my intention to stay in the Labor Party," Mr Pyne said.
"I will continue to support the Government in Parliament. I didn't enter Parliament to put the LNP (Liberal National Party) in power, that's for sure."
But today, he told the Courier Mail he might leave.
"If I can't have some significant influence in delivering for the people of Cairns, in particular, I certainly would consider it," Mr Pyne was quoted as saying.
At Australia Day celebrations in Townsville, where she joined in a game of cricket, Ms Palaszczuk played down the apparent threat.
"I'm not going to deal in hypotheticals, and everybody should just calm down," Ms Palaszczuk said.
"It's Australia Day, I'm here to enjoy a barbecue and I'm sure millions of Queenslanders are doing exactly the same thing today as well."
The Opposition said the potential resignation of Mr Pyne could bring down the minority Labor Government, as Labor holds 43 seats in Parliament, while the LNP holds 42.
But Ms Palaszczuk said Mr Pyne was part of the Labor team.
"My phone is always there, any member of my team can talk to me at any time and they all know that," she said.
Deputy Opposition Leader John-Paul Langbroek urged Ms Palaszczuk to deal with Mr Pyne's grievances.
"Queenslanders didn't vote for disarray a year ago," Mr Langbroek said.
Topics: states-and-territories, government-and-politics, cairns-4870, qld, australia
First posted
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.
Two arrested after six hour siege at Maroubra in Sydney's east
Updated
Police have arrested two men after a six hour siege at a public housing unit complex at Maroubra in Sydney's east.
Officers arrived at the unit early Tuesday after a member of the public raised the alarm.
Key points: Two men arrested after suspected siege
Two men exit unit complex at 4.05pm (AEST)
One man tasered by police officers at the scene
"About 10:40 this morning police were called to a unit ... in relation to a male who possibly had a firearm," Detective Superintendent Gavin Dengate said.
He said police negotiated "with the man throughout the day" before two men exited the unit at 4:05pm (AEST).
"We actually called the Negotiation Unit and the Tactical Operations Unit because of the belief he had a firearm," he said.
One of the men was tasered by officers for failing to "comply with police instructions" and was seen by paramedics who were on standby.
Both men have been taken into custody and are being interviewed at Maroubra Police Station.
It is unclear if one of the men was being held hostage.
"At this stage we are working through that very question," Detective Superintendent Dengate said.
"We do know that the two men in the unit do know the occupier of the unit. We do know that two men are known to each other.
"Both are local men.
"We will allege police did see a firearm in the unit and hence the safety of the community was paramount."
Officers at the scene had cordoned off the area during the police operation and several streets were closed.
Local Robert Walford said he woke up to his neighbour running past his house in a distressed state.
"I went outside to check to see if she was okay and what was the problem, next minute she went next door ... to get help there.
"She was on the phone to police at the time, like something really bad happened.
"She was saying there was a gun ... a guy with a gun, they had it at her head and she escaped, she got away.
"She knows them - everyone knows everyone around here."
Locals concerned about relatives inside the building
Earlier, Felicity Whittington said her grandmother was inside the building during the siege and described the situation as "nerve-wracking".
"I've been waiting for her out here since lunch time," Ms Wittington said.
"I just heard about a guy with a gun in the building, not sure what he's doing."
A former resident of the unit complex, Larry Davis said he was coming to visit a friend.
"I saw the SWAT team and I heard 'get on the ground now' and I walked through the flats it was happening at," he said.
"I walk through it a couple of days a week, it's on the second floor."
He said the police were outside the building trying to "keep everything under control".
Topics: crime, law-crime-and-justice, maroubra-2035, nsw, australia
First posted
Melbourne Victory defeats Sydney FC 1-0 through Matthew Jurman own goal in A-League Big Blue clash
Updated
The outstretched boot of Sydney FC's Matthew Jurman has given Melbourne Victory a barely deserved 1-0 Big Blue win at Docklands in their defence of the A-League championship.
For 79 minutes, Victory were unable to break open the league's meanest defence but as the match headed towards a stalemate, it was a Sydney FC defender that did the job for the hosts.
SCOREBOARD: MVC 1-0 SYD Victory 1-0 Sky Blues at Docklands, January 26, 2016 2 Shots on target 3 4 Shots off target 1 56% Possession 44% 11 Corners 1 6 Offsides 2 Melbourne Victory: 1 (M Jurman (OG) 79')

Sydney FC: 0

The own goal was credited to Jurman, but the plaudits should head to Jesse Makarounas.
The 21-year-old has been only a bit-part player since moving to the Victory four seasons ago.
But the substitute made a most important intervention where Kevin Muscat's championship-winners could not, surging from midfield to send over a centering ball that Jurman could not help but divert past unlucky keeper Vedran Janjetovic.
The grand final re-match had otherwise failed to fire up the 30,493-strong crowd on Australia Day.
The clearest chance came in the opening minute, when Janjetovic outstandingly saved a one-on-one chance from Besart Berisha.
What followed was a first half lacking in highlights, where offsides doubled the shots on goal count.
The half's biggest flashpoint arrived on 25 minutes, when Gui Finkler made a late, studs-up challenge on Matt Simon.
The Brazilian is better known for his flair but this was a nasty challenge that left the striker poorly and brought a booking.
Defence was winning the day and for the first time since April, Victory failed to lead a home game at half-time.
But Victory gained momentum from the hour-mark.
Kosta Barbarouses began to get clear of his marker, and on the other flank, Fahid Ben Khalfallah showed the quick thinking to spark something.
An eight-man wall kept out Milos Dimitrijevic's close-range free kick as Sydney sought a goal against the grain.
Victory finally had the ball in the back of the net, but referee Strebre Delovski correctly ruled out Berisha's effort out for another offside.
Then just as most were resigned to a boring draw, up popped Makarounas to settle the contest.
The three points lifts Victory over the Sky Blues into fourth on the A-League ladder, with the first five teams separated by just two points.
AAP
Topics: a-league, soccer, sport, melbourne-3000, vic, australia
First posted
Changing Australian flag would pave way to racial equality, Indigenous activist says
Updated
Changing the Australian flag would pave the way to racial equality, acclaimed Indigenous activist and playwright Richard Frankland says.
The prospect has gained increasing traction in recent days, with debate mounting over becoming a Republic.
Mr Frankland said the Union Jack symbolised "catastrophic loss in the form of absolute and total invasion."
He said Australia Day was high time to have the debate.
"Symbols and images, they provoke thought, they can enable people to create a pathway to change their lives," he said.
"We have the opportunity to be better than we are at the moment."
In a recent survey conducted by Western University Sydney, a design dubbed the Southern Horizon was voted most popular as an alternative design for the Australian flag.
Mr Frankland said the current flag assisted Australia in its "complacency" to redress the wrongs committed against Indigenous Australians.
"We live in a country where we deny our past, we live with a nursery version of history, and subsequently we have a people who have a great deal of trouble dealing with contemporary happenings," he said.
"How do we recognise the past for what it truly is, and how do we plant seeds here in the present for future generations?
"We do that by removing things that hurt us, and one of the things that hurt us is our flag, and the current shape of our flag."
He said changing the flag would be the next step forward towards indigenous recognition and reconciliation.
Mr Frankland is a contributor to the ABC's Open Drum project.
Topics: indigenous-policy, indigenous-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander, community-and-society, government-and-politics, narrawong-3285, vic
First posted
Chairman of the Seafood Co-operative Research Centre Peter Dundas-Smith.
Posted
Peter Dundas-Smith, chairman of the Seafood CRC, has been recognised for his 25 years of service to the fishing, seafood and aquaculture industries.
Topics: research-organisations, research, fishing-aquaculture, australia-day, nelson-bay-2315, adelaide-5000
Australia v India: Southern Stars beaten by five wickets as Harmanpreet Kaur stars
Updated
Occasionally when losing a game of cricket, all you can do is shrug your shoulders in the knowledge you were beaten by an opponent having a day out.
This was Australia's lot at the Adelaide Oval today, lowering its colours to India in the opening rubber of their three-match T20 international series by five wickets with eight balls up the visitors' sleeve.
The protagonist for India's record-breaking chase of 140 was Harmanpreet Kaur, who piled on 46 in 31 balls just as the required run rate neared nine an over.
Kaur's onslaught came just as the handbrake had been applied to her side's innings when established bats Veda Krishnamurthy (35) and Smriti Mandhana (29) - who put on 55 in 44 balls themselves - fell within minutes of each other.
When the former holed out in the 12th over Australia looked most of the way to victory. Alyssa Healy - who on almost any other day would have been the match-winner herself with a blistering unbeaten 41 in just 15 balls in the first innings - said as much when talking after the loss.
"Speaking honestly, I think it was enough," she said.
"In most bowling innings for us we are pretty comfortable with that; we'd think we'd be home and hosed, but (she) played an unbelievable innings."
Sensing the chance to run through the tourists, captain Meg Lanning bowled out her gun quick Ellyse Perry's (0 for 24) remaining two overs, but the Southern Stars didn't break the back of the Indians as they would have hoped.
Instead, Kaur sensed an opportunity. Her intent was signalled when popping spinner Jess Jonassen (2 for 24) over the midwicket fence. The next over she dug out a Sarah Coyte (0 for 32) to the rope before thumping a shorter ball later in the over to the point pickets.
Her eye well and truly now in, Kaur used the depth of the crease to turn a Megan Schutt (2 for 23) into a half volley. Last but not least, she took 14 from a Rene Farrell (1 for 23) over where debutant Beth Mooney (usually a wicketkeeper) twice could not complete slide-and-save efforts on the long-off rope.
Despite departing in the 18th over, the damage had been done after putting 45 on the board within four overs. By now India needed just eight more runs in 12 balls, but required only four of them.
It was appropriate that a superb Healy catch - up to the stumps to Schutt who was coming around the wicket - saw Kaur's demise. Healy's gloves were involved in Mandhana's earlier dismissal too, whipping the bails off to another Schutt delivery which did more than expected - Schutt, incidentally, was only introduced in the innings' eighth over.
Earlier, Healy's cameo with the bat looked every bit the defining contribution of the match from either side - until it wasn't.
Coming to the crease with Australia limping to 5 for 84 with just 26 balls remaining in the innings, she combined with Vice-Captain Alex Blackwell (27 not out in 22 balls) to pile on 59 unbeaten runs, pushing Australia to 5 for 140.
After 44 balls without a boundary, Healy struck five in her 15 balls, and a pair of consecutive sixes over the leg side rope for good measure, to completely alter the course of the home side's innings.
The decision to elevate Grace Harris to the top of the order - previously batting for Australia at number eight - did not work today, shovelling Indian opener Jhulan Goswami into the hands of Kaur at midwicket. The Queenslander threw her head back in dismay when walking off with a two ball duck.
Harris' state team-mate Mooney, who forced her way into the Australian XI for the first time after 400 runs in the inaugural WBBL, fared much better as the country's other new short-form opener. A run-a-ball 36, timing the ball sweetly through the offside in particular, suggests a serious new international talent.
Meg Lanning was given an early life, but didn't capitalise, Shikha Pandey (1 for 18) slipping an inducker beneath the bat of the prolific Australian captain for a scratchy 12. Surprisingly, Pandey was not used at the death of the innings to try and stop the Healy show.
Healy said it was an "odd feeling" to have performed so well yet to be walking off the field with a loss after ten consecutive home wins for the Southern Stars in this format of the game.
She acknowledged that it was a reality check early in the international summer, which culminates in the World T20 in March/April, but remained confident they would bounce back quickly.
"This is what these two series - this one and going to New Zealand - are there for [so] I don't think we're necessarily in crisis, being beaten today," Healy said.
The second match of the series will be played at the MCG on Friday afternoon.
Topics: cricket, sport, adelaide-5000, sa, australia
First posted
Wyong councillors to get confidential briefing on controversial Chinese theme park proposal
Posted
Wyong councillors will receive a confidential briefing on Wednesday afternoon, to outline where negotiations are at over a land purchase for the proposed $500 million Chappypie theme park.
"A heads of agreement has been signed and executed and the contracts are in the process of being drawn up," Wyong Council acting CEO Rob Noble said.
The confidential nature of the briefing has again ruffled some feathers.
"The people that own that land — the ratepayers of Wyong Shire — they've got to demand that this be taken out of confidential and be put out in the public eye," Wyong independent councillor Bob Graham said.
The 15 hectares of industrial land was sold to Australia China Theme Park (ACTP) for $10 million in 2012.
The company has so far paid just $100,000.
"It's just ridiculous," Cr Graham said. "Now they seem to want to drag it out for even longer to pay the money.
"I think it should be taken off them and if we want to sell the land, put it out for tender and see what sort of money we can get for it, and that money can go back into Wyong Shire," he said.
The park's backers asked Wyong Shire Council for new terms to pay the remaining $9.9 million before a December deadline.
MP calls for more transparency
Wyong state Labor MP David Harris has called for greater transparency.
"This company has no record of any development of this size. It was looked at by other council areas and knocked back," Mr Harris said.
"Why this council continues to pursue it — even when staff recommend them to drop it, which happened before Christmas — just beggars belief," he said.
The council has decided the CEO's office will negotiate directly with the company over the land purchase.
Mr Noble confirmed he had not met or spoken to the chief executive of ACTP, Bruce Zhong, leaving the negotiations to his senior staff.
He has defended the confidential briefings associated with the deal.
"It's a significant land sale deal and if any party is engaged in a land sale arrangement, they don't usually want other parties to be aware of the terms," Mr Noble said.
Department questions project figures
The Chappypie China Time park was granted conditional approval after being assessed under the State Government Planning Department's gateway process.
But the department rejected a move to rezone the site, and questioned figures about job and tourist projections.
"All the way through it's been in confidential. When it was put up in the first place it was never called for tenders, which it should have been — it's public land," Cr Graham said.
Mr Noble has only been acting CEO for six months, and would not be drawn on whether the land should have gone to tender.
"I have a personal opinion about that, but I'm not going to share it with you," he said.
Despite public disquiet over the development and queries as to whether it is "pie in the sky", the acting CEO believes the deal will proceed.
"You know you can't predict what delays might occur, certainly we're ready to go, so hopefully the company will be and if that occurs then that's great," Mr Noble said.
"At the moment I'm pretty confident the deal will go through, and that the council and community as a result will be in an improved situation to what they were in Christmas last year."
Mr Noble expects the contracts to be executed in two weeks, and then details will be revealed to the public.
Concerned locals have launched an online petition in a bid to stop the Chinese theme park going ahead.
Topics: urban-development-and-planning, wyong-2259
Police operation at Maroubra in Sydney
Posted
Police closed several streets as they conducted an operation at a public housing unit complex at Maroubra in Sydney's east. January 26, 2016.
Topics: police-sieges, maroubra-2035
Safety concerns over gas network in Perth apartments highlighted in Energy Safety report
Updated
WA's energy safety regulator and the owner of Perth's gas network have serious concerns about the safety of more than 750 gas installations in big apartment blocks, according to a new report.
Key points: Serious safety risks identified in hundreds of apartment block gas systems.
Flues of these systems can't cope with greater input
Integrity of old asbestos flues are also compromised
Regulator struggling to recruit enough inspectors
The report by Energy Safety, tabled in WA Parliament yesterday, said problems with an approximately 900 badly maintained gas installations were identified five years ago.
But while 134 of the most dangerous gas installations had been fixed, the report said EnergySafety and ATCO Gas Australia were still concerned about serious safety risks which were yet to be addressed in many others.
"Many of these installations had instantaneous gas hot water systems connected to multiple flued systems, frequently of old asbestos flue construction," the report said.
"Over time, replacement water heaters have been fitted with higher gas input than the flue system capacity as well as disturbing the integrity of the existing asbestos flues.
"Many other legacy issues have been identified which pose a serious safety risk for these multi-storey gas installations."
Over the next 18 months, EnergySafety and ATCO will continue to inspect the remaining risky multi-flue systems in apartment blocks.
However, the report said EnergySafety was struggling to fulfil its role as a safety regulator, which includes ensuring gas and electrical work meets safety standards, because of problems with recruiting inspectors.
The agency was short of nine staff, which was partly due to difficulties in competing with the private sector for suitably qualified workers.
"This has especially been the case over the last decade, when WA's economy has been strong and competition for suitable staff has been high," it said.
"In its efforts to recruit specialist technical personnel suited to regulatory work, EnergySafety competes directly with the gas and electricity network operators, major consultancies and large construction contractors."
Report highlights rise in electric shocks, serious injuries
As well as the deaths of two men after a high-voltage switch blew up at Morley Galleria last year, the report said there had been an increase in serious injuries related to gas and electrical accidents.
There were 15 non-fatal accidents last financial year, compared to 12 the year before, as well as a 33 per cent increase in electric shocks between the two years.
Gas injuries have been increasing over the past decade, last year recording the highest number in that time period.
The report said that there was a link between media awareness campaigns and safety, and warned that it was important to continue funding safety-related campaigns.
"It may be that the decision to cease major media advertising campaigns will need to be revisited in the future, should the trends of serious incidents and fatalities continue upwards as they have in the past few years," it said.
"Otherwise, alternative means of communication and targeted campaigns will need to be identified."
Topics: safety, residential, perth-6000
First posted
Australian Open: Roger Federer beats Tomas Berdych to make semi-finals at Melbourne Park
Updated
Roger Federer set up a potential semi-final clash with world number one Novak Djokovic following a clinical straight-sets win over Tomas Berdych at the Australian Open.
The third-seeded Federer was tested in the opening set against Berdych but showed his class to win 7-6 (7-4), 6-2, 6-4 on Rod Laver Arena to advance to the semi-finals for the 12th occasion from his past 13 visits to Melbourne Park.
Federer awaits the winner of Tuesday's second quarter-final between defending champion Djokovic and Japanese seventh seed Kei Nishikori.
Federer will be playing for a place in the title match in Melbourne for the first time since claiming a fourth trophy in 2010.
He should be bristling with confidence after breaking Berdych on five occasions and crunching 46 winners to romp into the semi-finals.
"I'm very, very happy. Tomas has caused me a lot of problems over the years," Federer said in a courtside interview.
"He's one of the guys who makes you a better player. He's beaten me around the world on the biggest courts.
"I played a great match. I was aggressive, had some variety in there and I'm very happy I was able to play like that."
There was no indication early on it would all be so easy.
Berdych made a dream start to the match, breaking Federer in the opening game.
But it did not take the 17-time major champion long to warm to the task, striking straight back before rolling through the tie-breaker and gaining an early break in the second set to assume complete control.
Toying with Berdych by now, Federer lured the big Czech to the net and hooked a ridiculous forehand pass around him to bring up another break point, then stormed forward himself to convert for a 5-2 buffer.
He made no mistake closing out the set before dropping serve to ever so briefly offer Berdych a glimmer of hope.
A semi-finalist the past two years, Berdych was unable to capitalise as Federer again hit right back before finishing the world number six in three straight sets.
ABC/AAP
Topics: australian-open, tennis, sport, melbourne-3000
First posted
Peter Dundas-Smith has been honoured for his service to the fishing, seafood and aquaculture industries
Posted
Seafood CRC chairman Peter Dundas-Smith says he is is honoured to receive an AM for his 25 years work in the seafood industry.
Source: ABC Rural | Duration: 11min 2sec
Topics: research-organisations, research, fishing-aquaculture, australia-day, nelson-bay-2315, adelaide-5000
Mats rolled out to give people with disabilities access to Seacliff Beach in Adelaide's south
Posted
People with disabilities will now be able to reach the water's edge at Seacliff Beach thanks to a specially designed plastic mat — a first in South Australia.
Local Liberal MP David Speirs coordinated a community fundraising effort over the past three months to fund a trial of the 100-metre-long, $10,000 mat.
The first wheelchair user was Charlie Rowland, who has been unable to visit he beach for years but had little trouble in moving down the mat onto the hard sand.
"It's really great to come down and enjoy the beach," he said.
"I guess I was hoping I'd finally be able to come to the beach again."
Mr Speirs said disability access to Adelaide's beaches was overdue.
"I think the beach has been overlooked and the beach gives you such quality of life," Mr Spiers said.
"Personally for me it's actually quite emotional to see our community was able to do this and to give people like Charlie an opportunity to get to the water's edge is hugely rewarding."
Not long after the mat was rolled out, Roger Baker who uses a walking frame, gave it a try.
"We don't walk very often on the beach like we used to," Mr Baker said.
"It [the mat] makes it very much easier," he said.
Seacliff resident and grandfather Tony Lake said the mat also made pushing a pram on the beach much easier.
"I hope this is only the beginning ... I'm very pleased to see this," he said.
Mr Speirs said similar mats are used on beaches interstate and there had been interest in the idea from other South Australian councils.
"I think from this trial we can look at opportunities to roll pathways like this out across metropolitan Adelaide and South Australia," Mr Speirs said.
"I think there's huge scope to open up beaches to people who normally wouldn't be able to get to the water's edge, the sky's the limit."
The mat will be rolled out by Surf Life Saving SA volunteers on weekends and public holidays, until March.
Topics: states-and-territories, government-and-politics, seacliff-5049, sa, australia
Teenager dies in car crash at Willaura in Victoria's west
Posted
A teenager has died after the car he was travelling in crashed into a tree in Victoria's west.
Police said the accident happened at Willaura on Mafeking Road about 12:17pm.
The boy, believed to be in the passenger seat, died at the scene.
The female driver was taken to Ararat Hospital with serious injuries
Police said they do not know what caused the accident.
Topics: police, willaura-3379
FinFisher spyware: Indonesian government 'using Sydney server for surveillance program'
Updated
The notorious spyware FinFisher, used to infect mobile phones and computers to place targets under surveillance, has been found in a Sydney data centre.
Key points: Researchers uncover FinFisher's global network of proxy servers
One belonging to Indonesia is found in Sydney's Global Switch Data Centre
Indonesia also revealed as a prolific user of the hacking spyware
A proxy server inside the Global Switch data centre in Ultimo, Sydney is being used to obscure the real user of the spyware, in this case an Indonesian government agency, according to a group of technology researchers.
A proxy server acts as an intermediary which protects the identity of its real user.
The intrusive spyware developed by Munich-based FinFisher Gamma Group is sold exclusively to government agencies as a way to "help identify, locate and convict serious criminals".
However, there are also well documented cases in which governments have abused the highly invasive spyware by targeting political opponents within their borders and overseas.
According to Privacy International FinFisher was recently used by the Ugandan government to gather "hordes of information" on political opponents and "control the media houses".
In Bahrain, authorities are accused of using the technology to place three young activists under surveillance whilst they were living in the UK. The trio say as a result of the surveillance they were relentlessly pursued and tortured at the hands of Bahraini authorities.
Do you know more about this story? Email investigations@abc.net.au
Once deployed, FinFisher is able to remotely control any computer or mobile phone it infects, copy files, intercept Skype calls, and activate a microphone or webcam.
What does the spyware do? Once deployed, the software can remotely control any computer or mobile phone it infects
It can copy files, intercept Skype calls, and activate a microphone or webcam
One of its key features is its ability to hide the true identity of the end user
It's sold to government agencies to use in criminal investigations
The Ultimo proxy server was among a network of FinFisher servers around the world which were unveiled by Bill Marczak, one of a team of researchers at CitizenLab.
"What it means is that the information from the targets who are infected (with FinFisher) is going through Australia before it reached the final master server inside Indonesia," Mr Marczak said.
The research also reveals Indonesia to be one of the most avid users of FinFisher spyware.
"We were able to identify one specific government user inside Indonesia, the National Crypto Agency (Lembaga Sandi Negara) but we also found evidence that there were many other government users inside Indonesia, in other words many separate agencies that were using many separate deployments of FinFisher," he said.
It is not clear which Indonesian government agency is responsible for the proxy server at Ultimo.
The ABC approached ASIO and the Department of Defence, which declined to comment.
The ABC also approached Damon Reid, the executive director of the Global Switch data centre, to ask if the company was aware of the FinFisher server.
Mr Reid declined to answer, referring the question to the company's marketing director in London.
On Monday, comment was sought from the Indonesian Embassy in Canberra, but after no response the ABC sought comment from Jakarta. At the time of publishing no response had been received from Indonesia's Cyber Security Agency (Lembaga Sandi Negara).
ABC obtains leaked Indonesian intelligence
In addition to the FinFisher report, the ABC has obtained an Indonesian intelligence report from last year listing a number of West Papuan independence activists, including students and Christian leaders, who appear to be on an active surveillance list.
The document identifies their weaknesses, including "women and alcohol" and "always complains about funds shortages".
It also lists its aim as being to "suppress and divide the movement".
Papuans are engaged in a struggle for independence from Indonesia stretching back decades.
The ABC has not found evidence that FinFisher spyware has been deployed on this particular list of targets.
Adam Molnar, lecturer in surveillance technology and law at Deakin University, said there was very little transparency and legal oversight for powerful surveillance tools like FinFisher.
"I think that cuts to the heart of the problem. There is so little transparency in this space, there's a lot of secrecy and I think we need to remedy that in such a way that citizens can be aware of the types of services that their governments are contracting", he said.
Legal questions arise over use of sophisticated spyware
Regulating the use of FinFisher across borders has proven difficult.
It opens up the field of sophisticated surveillance to anybody with a chequebook. Bill Marczak, researcher
However, there is some discussion about how and why governments procure these types of surveillance technologies in complete secrecy from private companies.
In the UK, Privacy International has requested Britain's National Crime Agency investigate the Gamma Group for breaching the UK's Serious Crimes Act by aiding the surveillance of three pro-democracy activists targeted by Bahrain's authorities.
The request follows the leak of two internal Gamma documents revealing the company was aware and actively facilitating the Bahraini's regime's surveillance of targets living outside Bahrain using FinFisher spyware.
Researcher Bill Marczak said the use of FinFisher was on the rise, and he was surprised by the range of countries who were clients of the company.
Agencies and governments using the software ranged from Belgium's Federal Police to countries responsible for human rights abuses including Kenya, Angola and Saudi Arabia.
"I felt very concerned about the list of countries we had found," he said.
"I think I would have felt far less concerned if the spyware was only turning up in countries which had a robust rule of law and oversight of intelligence and law enforcement.
"As early as a few years ago it was not possible for governments like Angola, for example, to get this sophisticated spyware capability. It simply wasn't available.
"It opens up the field of sophisticated surveillance to anybody with a chequebook."
Topics: internet-technology, computers-and-technology, science-and-technology, security-intelligence, defence-and-national-security, ultimo-2007, nsw, australia, indonesia
First posted
Phil Salt examines where a fossil was removed from the Ulladulla Harbour
Posted
Phil Salt is baffled as to why someone would steal a fossil from the rock platform at the Ulladulla Harbour.
Topics: environmental-impact, crime, ulladulla-2539
